
CHAPTER I. LOVE ON THE OCEAN


Nothing is so easy as falling in love on a long sea voyage, except
falling out of love. Especially was this the case in the days when the
wooden clippers did finely to land you in Sydney or in Melbourne under
the four full months. We all saw far too much of each other, unless,
indeed, we were to see still more. Our superficial attractions mutually
exhausted, we lost heart and patience in the disappointing strata
which lie between the surface and the bed-rock of most natures. My own
experience was confined to the round voyage of the Lady Jermyn, in the
year 1853. It was no common experience, as was only too well known
at the time. And I may add that I for my part had not the faintest
intention of falling in love on board; nay, after all these years,
let me confess that I had good cause to hold myself proof against such
weakness. Yet we carried a young lady, coming home, who, God knows,
might have made short work of many a better man!

Eva Denison was her name, and she cannot have been more than nineteen
years of age. I remember her telling me that she had not yet come out,
the very first time I assisted her to promenade the poop. My own name
was still unknown to her, and yet I recollect being quite fascinated by
her frankness and self-possession. She was exquisitely young, and yet
ludicrously old for her years; had been admirably educated, chiefly
abroad, and, as we were soon to discover, possessed accomplishments
which would have made the plainest old maid a popular personage on board
ship. Miss Denison, however, was as beautiful as she was young, with the
bloom of ideal health upon her perfect skin. She had a wealth of lovely
hair, with strange elusive strands of gold among the brown, that drowned
her ears (I thought we were to have that mode again?) in sunny ripples;
and a soul greater than the mind, and a heart greater than either, lay
sleeping somewhere in the depths of her grave, gray eyes.

We were at sea together so many weeks. I cannot think what I was made of
then!

It was in the brave old days of Ballarat and Bendigo, when ship after
ship went out black with passengers and deep with stores, to bounce home
with a bale or two of wool, and hardly hands enough to reef topsails
in a gale. Nor was this the worst; for not the crew only, but, in many
cases, captain and officers as well, would join in the stampede to the
diggings; and we found Hobson's Bay the congested asylum of all manner
of masterless and deserted vessels. I have a lively recollection of our
skipper's indignation when the pilot informed him of this disgraceful
fact. Within a fortnight, however, I met the good man face to face upon
the diggings. It is but fair to add that the Lady Jermyn lost every
officer and man in the same way, and that the captain did obey tradition
to the extent of being the last to quit his ship. Nevertheless, of
all who sailed by her in January, I alone was ready to return at the
beginning of the following July.

I had been to Ballarat. I had given the thing a trial. For the most
odious weeks I had been a licensed digger on Black Hill Flats; and I had
actually failed to make running expenses. That, however, will surprise
you the less when I pause to declare that I have paid as much as four
shillings and sixpence for half a loaf of execrable bread; that my mate
and I, between us, seldom took more than a few pennyweights of gold-dust
in any one day; and never once struck pick into nugget, big or little,
though we had the mortification of inspecting the “mammoth masses” of
which we found the papers full on landing, and which had brought the
gold-fever to its height during our very voyage. With me, however, as
with many a young fellow who had turned his back on better things, the
malady was short-lived. We expected to make our fortunes out of hand,
and we had reckoned without the vermin and the villainy which rendered
us more than ever impatient of delay. In my fly-blown blankets I dreamt
of London until I hankered after my chambers and my club more than after
much fine gold. Never shall I forget my first hot bath on getting back
to Melbourne; it cost five shillings, but it was worth five pounds, and
is altogether my pleasantest reminiscence of Australia.

There was, however, one slice of luck in store for me. I found the dear
old Lady Jermyn on the very eve of sailing, with a new captain, a new
crew, a handful of passengers (chiefly steerage), and nominally no cargo
at all. I felt none the less at home when I stepped over her familiar
side.

In the cuddy we were only five, but a more uneven quintette I defy you
to convene. There was a young fellow named Ready, packed out for
his health, and hurrying home to die among friends. There was an
outrageously lucky digger, another invalid, for he would drink nothing
but champagne with every meal and at any minute of the day, and I have
seen him pitch raw gold at the sea-birds by the hour together. Miss
Denison was our only lady, and her step-father, with whom she was
travelling, was the one man of distinction on board. He was a Portuguese
of sixty or thereabouts, Senhor Joaquin Santos by name; at first it was
incredible to me that he had no title, so noble was his bearing; but
very soon I realized that he was one of those to whom adventitious
honors can add no lustre. He treated Miss Denison as no parent ever
treated a child, with a gallantry and a courtliness quite beautiful to
watch, and not a little touching in the light of the circumstances under
which they were travelling together. The girl had gone straight from
school to her step-father's estate on the Zambesi, where, a few months
later, her mother had died of the malaria. Unable to endure the place
after his wife's death, Senhor Santos had taken ship to Victoria, there
to seek fresh fortune with results as indifferent as my own. He was
now taking Miss Denison back to England, to make her home with other
relatives, before he himself returned to Africa (as he once told me) to
lay his bones beside those of his wife. I hardly know which of the pair
I see more plainly as I write--the young girl with her soft eyes and her
sunny hair, or the old gentleman with the erect though wasted figure,
the noble forehead, the steady eye, the parchment skin, the white
imperial, and the eternal cigarette between his shrivelled lips.

No need to say that I came more in contact with the young girl. She was
not less charming in my eyes because she provoked me greatly as I came
to know her intimately. She had many irritating faults. Like most young
persons of intellect and inexperience, she was hasty and intolerant in
nearly all her judgments, and rather given to being critical in a crude
way. She was very musical, playing the guitar and singing in a style
that made our shipboard concerts vastly superior to the average of their
order; but I have seen her shudder at the efforts of less gifted folks
who were also doing their best; and it was the same in other directions
where her superiority was less specific. The faults which are most
exasperating in another are, of course, one's own faults; and I confess
that I was very critical of Eva Denison's criticisms. Then she had
a little weakness for exaggeration, for unconscious egotism in
conversation, and I itched to tell her so. I felt so certain that the
girl had a fine character underneath, which would rise to noble heights
in stress or storm: all the more would I long now to take her in hand
and mould her in little things, and anon to take her in my arms just as
she was. The latter feeling was resolutely crushed. To be plain, I had
endured what is euphemistically called “disappointment” already; and,
not being a complete coxcomb, I had no intention of courting a second.

Yet, when I write of Eva Denison, I am like to let my pen outrun my
tale. I lay the pen down, and a hundred of her sayings ring in my
ears, with my own contradictious comments, that I was doomed so soon
to repent; a hundred visions of her start to my eyes; and there is the
trade-wind singing in the rigging, and loosening a tress of my darling's
hair, till it flies like a tiny golden streamer in the tropic sun.
There, it is out! I have called her what she was to be in my heart ever
after. Yet at the time I must argue with her--with her! When all my
courage should have gone to love-making, I was plucking it up to sail as
near as I might to plain remonstrance! I little dreamt how the ghost of
every petty word was presently to return and torture me.

So it is that I can see her and hear her now on a hundred separate
occasions beneath the awning beneath the stars on deck below at noon
or night but plainest of all in the evening of the day we signalled
the Island of Ascension, at the close of that last concert on the
quarter-deck. The watch are taking down the extra awning; they are
removing the bunting and the foot-lights. The lanterns are trailed
forward before they are put out; from the break of the poop we watch the
vivid shifting patch of deck that each lights up on its way. The stars
are very sharp in the vast violet dome above our masts; they shimmer on
the sea; and our trucks describe minute orbits among the stars, for the
trades have yet to fail us, and every inch of canvas has its fill of the
gentle steady wind. It is a heavenly night. The peace of God broods upon
His waters. No jarring note offends the ear. In the forecastle a voice
is humming a song of Eva Denison's that has caught the fancy of the men;
the young girl who sang it so sweetly not twenty minutes since who
sang it again and again to please the crew she alone is at war with our
little world she alone would head a mutiny if she could.

“I hate the captain!” she says again.

“My dear Miss Denison!” I begin; for she has always been severe upon our
bluff old man, and it is not the spirit of contrariety alone which makes
me invariably take his part. Coarse he may be, and not one whom the
owners would have chosen to command the Lady Jermyn; a good seaman none
the less, who brought us round the Horn in foul weather without losing
stitch or stick. I think of the ruddy ruffian in his dripping oilskins,
on deck day and night for our sakes, and once more I must needs take his
part; but Miss Denison stops me before I can get out another word.

“I am not dear, and I'm not yours,” she cries. “I'm only a
school-girl--you have all but told me so before to-day! If I were a
man--if I were you--I should tell Captain Harris what I thought of him!”

“Why? What has he done now?”

“Now? You know how rude he was to poor Mr. Ready this very afternoon!”

It was true. He had been very rude indeed. But Ready also had been at
fault. It may be that I was always inclined to take an opposite view,
but I felt bound to point this out, and at any cost.

“You mean when Ready asked him if we were out of our course? I must
say I thought it was a silly question to put. It was the same the other
evening about the cargo. If the skipper says we're in ballast why not
believe him? Why repeat steerage gossip, about mysterious cargoes, at
the cuddy table? Captains are always touchy about that sort of thing. I
wasn't surprised at his letting out.”

My poor love stares at me in the starlight. Her great eyes flash their
scorn. Then she gives a little smile--and then a little nod--more
scornful than all the rest.

“You never are surprised, are you, Mr. Cole?” says she. “You were not
surprised when the wretch used horrible language in front of me! You
were not surprised when it was a--dying man--whom he abused!”

I try to soothe her. I agree heartily with her disgust at the epithets
employed in her hearing, and towards an invalid, by the irate skipper.
But I ask her to make allowances for a rough, uneducated man, rather
clumsily touched upon his tender spot. I shall conciliate her presently;
the divine pout (so childish it was!) is fading from her lips; the
starlight is on the tulle and lace and roses of her pretty evening
dress, with its festooned skirts and obsolete flounces; and I am
watching her, ay, and worshipping her, though I do not know it yet. And
as we stand there comes another snatch from the forecastle:--

       “What will you do, love, when I am going.
            With white sail flowing,
            The seas beyond?
        What will you do, love--”

“They may make the most of that song,” says Miss Denison grimly; “it's
the last they'll have from me. Get up as many more concerts as you like.
I won't sing at another unless it's in the fo'c'sle. I'll sing to the
men, but not to Captain Harris. He didn't put in an appearance tonight.
He shall not have another chance of insulting me.”

Was it her vanity that was wounded after all? “You forget,” said I,
“that you would not answer when he addressed you at dinner.”

“I should think I wouldn't, after the way he spoke to Mr. Ready; and he
too agitated to come to table, poor fellow!”

“Still, the captain felt the open slight.”

“Then he shouldn't have used such language in front of me.”

“Your father felt it, too, Miss Denison.”

I hear nothing plainer than her low but quick reply:

“Mr. Cole, my father has been dead many; many years; he died before I
can remember. That man only married my poor mother. He sympathizes
with Captain Harris--against me; no father would do that. Look at them
together now! And you take his side, too; oh! I have no patience with
any of you--except poor Mr. Ready in his berth.”

“But you are not going.”

“Indeed I am. I am tired of you all.”

And she was gone with angry tears for which I blamed myself as I fell to
pacing the weather side of the poop--and so often afterwards! So often,
and with such unavailing bitterness!

Senhor Santos and the captain were in conversation by the weather rail.
I fancied poor old Harris eyed me with suspicion, and I wished he had
better cause. The Portuguese, however, saluted me with his customary
courtesy, and I thought there was a grave twinkle in his steady eye.

“Are you in deesgrace also, friend Cole?” he inquired in his all but
perfect English.

“More or less,” said I ruefully.

He gave the shrug of his country--that delicate gesture which is done
almost entirely with the back--a subtlety beyond the power of British
shoulders.

“The senhora is both weelful and pivish,” said he, mixing the two vowels
which (with the aspirate) were his only trouble with our tongue. “It is
great grif to me to see her growing so unlike her sainted mother!”

He sighed, and I saw his delicate fingers forsake the cigarette they
were rolling to make the sacred sign upon his breast. He was always
smoking one cigarette and making another; as he lit the new one the glow
fell upon a strange pin that he wore, a pin with a tiny crucifix inlaid
in mosaic. So the religious cast of Senhor Santos was brought twice home
to me in the same moment, though, to be sure, I had often been struck
by it before. And it depressed me to think that so sweet a child as Eva
Denison should have spoken harshly of so good a man as her step-father,
simply because he had breadth enough to sympathize with a coarse old
salt like Captain Harris.

I turned in, however, and I cannot say the matter kept me awake in the
separate state-room which was one luxury of our empty saloon. Alas? I
was a heavy sleeper then.




CHAPTER II. THE MYSTERIOUS CARGO


“Wake up, Cole! The ship's on fire!”

It was young Ready's hollow voice, as cool, however, as though he were
telling me I was late for breakfast. I started up and sought him wildly
in the darkness.

“You're joking,” was my first thought and utterance; for now he was
lighting my candle, and blowing out the match with a care that seemed in
itself a contradiction.

“I wish I were,” he answered. “Listen to that!”

He pointed to my cabin ceiling; it quivered and creaked; and all at once
I was as a deaf man healed.

One gets inured to noise at sea, but to this day it passes me how even I
could have slept an instant in the abnormal din which I now heard raging
above my head. Sea-boots stamped; bare feet pattered; men bawled; women
shrieked; shouts of terror drowned the roar of command.

“Have we long to last?” I asked, as I leaped for my clothes.

“Long enough for you to dress comfortably. Steady, old man! It's only
just been discovered; they may get it under. The panic's the worst part
at present, and we're out of that.”

But was Eva Denison? Breathlessly I put the question; his answer was
reassuring. Miss Denison was with her step-father on the poop. “And both
of 'em as cool as cucumbers,” added Ready.

They could not have been cooler than this young man, with death at the
bottom of his bright and sunken eyes. He was of the type which is all
muscle and no constitution; athletes one year, dead men the next; but
until this moment the athlete had been to me a mere and incredible
tradition. In the afternoon I had seen his lean knees totter under the
captain's fire. Now, at midnight--the exact time by my watch--it was as
if his shrunken limbs had expanded in his clothes; he seemed hardly to
know his own flushed face, as he caught sight of it in my mirror.

“By Jove!” said he, “this has put me in a fine old fever; but I don't
know when I felt in better fettle. If only they get it under! I've not
looked like this all the voyage.”

And he admired himself while I dressed in hot haste: a fine young
fellow; not at all the natural egotist, but cast for death by the
doctors, and keenly incredulous in his bag of skin. It revived one's
confidence to hear him talk. But he forgot himself in an instant, and
gave me a lead through the saloon with a boyish eagerness that made me
actually suspicious as I ran. We were nearing the Line. I recalled the
excesses of my last crossing, and I prepared for some vast hoax at the
last moment. It was only when we plunged upon the crowded quarter-deck,
and my own eyes read lust of life and dread of death in the starting
eyes of others, that such lust and such dread consumed me in my turn, so
that my veins seemed filled with fire and ice.

To be fair to those others, I think that the first wild panic was
subsiding even then; at least there was a lull, and even a reaction in
the right direction on the part of the males in the second class and
steerage. A huge Irishman at their head, they were passing buckets
towards the after-hold; the press of people hid the hatchway from
us until we gained the poop; but we heard the buckets spitting and a
hose-pipe hissing into the flames below; and we saw the column of white
vapor rising steadily from their midst.

At the break of the poop stood Captain Harris, his legs planted wide
apart, very vigorous, very decisive, very profane. And I must confess
that the shocking oaths which had brought us round the Horn inspired a
kind of confidence in me now. Besides, even from the poop I could see
no flames. But the night was as beautiful as it had been an hour or two
back; the stars as brilliant, the breeze even more balmy, the sea even
more calm; and we were hove-to already, against the worst.

In this hour of peril the poop was very properly invaded by all classes
of passengers, in all manner of incongruous apparel, in all stages of
fear, rage, grief and hysteria; as we made our way among this motley
nightmare throng, I took Ready by the arm.

“The skipper's a brute,” said I, “but he's the right brute in the right
place to-night, Ready!”

“I hope he may be,” was the reply. “But we were off our course this
afternoon; and we were off it again during the concert, as sure as we're
not on it now.”

His tone made me draw him to the rail.

“But how do you know? You didn't have another look, did you?”

“Lots of looks-at the stars. He couldn't keep me from consulting them;
and I'm just as certain of it as I'm certain that we've a cargo aboard
which we're none of us supposed to know anything about.”

The latter piece of gossip was, indeed, all over the ship; but this
allusion to it struck me as foolishly irrelevant and frivolous. As to
the other matter, I suggested that the officers would have had more to
say about it than Ready, if there had been anything in it.

“Officers be damned!” cried our consumptive, with a sound man's vigor.
“They're ordinary seamen dressed up; I don't believe they've a second
mate's certificate between them, and they're frightened out of their
souls.”

“Well, anyhow, the skipper isn't that.”

“No; he's drunk; he can shout straight, but you should hear him try to
speak.”

I made my way aft without rejoinder. “Invalid's pessimism,” was my
private comment. And yet the sick man was whole for the time being; the
virile spirit was once more master of the recreant members; and it
was with illogical relief that I found those I sought standing almost
unconcernedly beside the binnacle.

My little friend was, indeed, pale enough, and her eyes great with
dismay; but she stood splendidly calm, in her travelling cloak and
bonnet, and with all my soul I hailed the hardihood with which I had
rightly credited my love. Yes! I loved her then. It had come home to me
at last, and I no longer denied it in my heart. In my innocence and my
joy I rather blessed the fire for showing me her true self and my own;
and there I stood, loving her openly with my eyes (not to lose another
instant), and bursting to tell her so with my lips.

But there also stood Senhor Santos, almost precisely as I had seen him
last, cigarette, tie-pin, and all. He wore an overcoat, however, and
leaned upon a massive ebony cane, while he carried his daughter's guitar
in its case, exactly as though they were waiting for a train. Moreover,
I thought that for the first time he was regarding me with no very
favoring glance.

“You don't think it serious?” I asked him abruptly, my heart still
bounding with the most incongruous joy.

He gave me his ambiguous shrug; and then, “A fire at sea is surely
sirrious,” said he.

“Where did it break out?”

“No one knows; it may have come of your concert.”

“But they are getting the better of it?”

“They are working wonders so far, senhor.”

“You see, Miss Denison,” I continued ecstatically, “our rough old
diamond of a skipper is the right man in the right place after all. A
tight man in a tight place, eh?” and I laughed like an idiot in their
calm grave faces.

“Senhor Cole is right,” said Santos, “although his 'ilarity sims a
leetle out of place. But you must never spik against Captain 'Arrees
again, menma.”

“I never will,” the poor child said; yet I saw her wince whenever the
captain raised that hoarse voice of his in more and more blasphemous
exhortation; and I began to fear with Ready that the man was drunk.

My eyes were still upon my darling, devouring her, revelling in her,
when suddenly I saw her hand twitch within her step-father's arm. It was
an answering start to one on his part. The cigarette was snatched from
his lips. There was a commotion forward, and a cry came aft, from mouth
to mouth:

“The flames! The flames!”

I turned, and caught their reflection on the white column of smoke and
steam. I ran forward, and saw them curling and leaping in the hell-mouth
of the hold.

The quarter-deck now staged a lurid scene: that blazing trap-door in
its midst; and each man there a naked demon madly working to save his
roasting skin. Abaft the mainmast the deck-pump was being ceaselessly
worked by relays of the passengers; dry blankets were passed forward,
soaking blankets were passed aft, and flung flat into the furnace one
after another. These did more good than the pure water: the pillar of
smoke became blacker, denser: we were at a crisis; a sudden hush denoted
it; even our hoarse skipper stood dumb.

I had rushed down into the waist of the ship--blushing for my delay--and
already I was tossing blankets with the rest. Looking up in an enforced
pause, I saw Santos whispering in the skipper's ear, with the expression
of a sphinx but no lack of foreign gesticulation--behind them a fringe
of terror-stricken faces, parted at that instant by two more figures,
as wild and strange as any in that wild, strange scene. One was our
luckless lucky digger, the other a gigantic Zambesi nigger, who for
days had been told off to watch him; this was the servant (or rather the
slave) of Senhor Santos.

The digger planted himself before the captain. His face was reddened by
a fire as consuming as that within the bowels of our gallant ship. He
had a huge, unwieldy bundle under either arm.

“Plain question--plain answer,” we heard him stutter. “Is there any ----
chance of saving this ---- ship?”

His adjectives were too foul for print; they were given with such a
special effort at distinctness, however, that I was smiling one instant,
and giving thanks the next that Eva Denison had not come forward with
her guardian. Meanwhile the skipper had exchanged a glance with Senhor
Santos, and I think we all felt that he was going to tell us the truth.

He told it in two words--“Very little.”

Then the first individual tragedy was enacted before every eye. With
a yell the drunken maniac rushed to the rail. The nigger was at his
heels--he was too late. Uttering another and more piercing shriek, the
madman was overboard at a bound; one of his bundles preceded him; the
other dropped like a cannon-ball on the deck.

The nigger caught it up and carried it forward to the captain.

Harris held up his hand. We were still before we had fairly found our
tongues. His words did run together a little, but he was not drunk.

“Men and women,” said he, “what I told that poor devil is Gospel truth;
but I didn't tell him we'd no chance of saving our lives, did I? Not
me, because we have! Keep your heads and listen to me. There's two
good boats on the davits amidships; the chief will take one, the second
officer the other; and there ain't no reason why every blessed one of
you shouldn't sleep in Ascension to-morrow night. As for me, let me see
every soul off of my ship and perhaps I may follow; but by the God that
made you, look alive! Mr. Arnott--Mr. McClellan--man them boats and
lower away. You can't get quit o' the ship too soon, an' I don't mind
tellin' you why. I'll tell you the worst, an' then you'll know. There's
been a lot o' gossip goin', gossip about my cargo. I give out as I'd
none but ship's stores and ballast, an' I give out a lie. I don't mind
tellin' you now. I give out a cussed lie, but I give it out for the
good o' the ship! What was the use o' frightenin' folks? But where's the
sense in keepin' it back now? We have a bit of a cargo,” shouted Harris;
“and it's gunpowder--every damned ton of it!”

The effect of this announcement may be imagined; my hand has not the
cunning to reproduce it on paper; and if it had, it would shrink from
the task. Mild men became brutes, brutal men, devils, women--God help
them!--shrieking beldams for the most part. Never shall I forget them
with their streaming hair, their screaming open mouths, and the cruel
ascending fire glinting on their starting eyeballs!

Pell-mell they tumbled down the poop-ladders; pell-mell they raced
amidships past that yawning open furnace; the pitch was boiling through
the seams of the crackling deck; they slipped and fell upon it, one over
another, and the wonder is that none plunged headlong into the flames.
A handful remained on the poop, cowering and undone with terror. Upon
these turned Captain Harris, as Ready and I, stemming the torrent of
maddened humanity, regained the poop ourselves.

“For'ard with ye!” yelled the skipper. “The powder's underneath you in
the lazarette!”

They were gone like hunted sheep. And now abaft the flaming hatchway
there were only we four surviving saloon passengers, the captain, his
steward, the Zambesi negro, and the quarter-master at the wheel. The
steward and the black I observed putting stores aboard the captain's gig
as it overhung the water from the stern davits.

“Now, gentlemen,” said Harris to the two of us, “I must trouble you to
step forward with the rest. Senhor Santos insists on taking his chance
along with the young lady in my gig. I've told him the risk, but he
insists, and the gig'll hold no more.”

“But she must have a crew, and I can row. For God's sake take me,
captain!” cried I; for Eva Denison sat weeping in her deck chair, and my
heart bled faint at the thought of leaving her, I who loved her so, and
might die without ever telling her my love! Harris, however, stood firm.

“There's that quartermaster and my steward, and Jose the nigger,” said
he. “That's quite enough, Mr. Cole, for I ain't above an oar myself;
but, by God, I'm skipper o' this here ship, and I'll skip her as long as
I remain aboard!”

I saw his hand go to his belt; I saw the pistols stuck there for
mutineers. I looked at Santos. He answered me with his neutral shrug,
and, by my soul, he struck a match and lit a cigarette in that hour of
life and death! Then last I looked at Ready; and he leant invertebrate
over the rail, gasping pitiably from his exertions in regaining the
poop, a dying man once more. I pointed out his piteous state.

“At least,” I whispered, “you won't refuse to take him?”

“Will there be anything to take?” said the captain brutally.

Santos advanced leisurely, and puffed his cigarette over the poor wasted
and exhausted frame.

“It is for you to decide, captain,” said he cynically; “but this one
will make no deeference. Yes, I would take him. It will not be far,” he
added, in a tone that was not the less detestable for being lowered.

“Take them both!” moaned little Eva, putting in her first and last sweet
word.

“Then we all drown, Evasinha,” said her stepfather. “It is impossible.”

“We're too many for her as it is,” said the captain. “So for'ard with
ye, Mr. Cole, before it's too late.”

But my darling's brave word for me had fired my blood, and I turned
with equal resolution on Harris and on the Portuguese. “I will go like
a lamb,” said I, “if you will first give me five minutes' conversation
with Miss Denison. Otherwise I do not go; and as for the gig, you may
take me or leave me, as you choose.”

“What have you to say to her?” asked Santos, coming up to me, and again
lowering his voice.

I lowered mine still more. “That I love her!” I answered in a soft
ecstasy. “That she may remember how I loved her, if I die!”

His shoulders shrugged a cynical acquiescence.

“By all mins, senhor; there is no harm in that.”

I was at her side before another word could pass his withered lips.

“Miss Denison, will you grant me five minutes', conversation? It may be
the last that we shall ever have together!”

Uncovering her face, she looked at me with a strange terror in her great
eyes; then with a questioning light that was yet more strange, for in it
there was a wistfulness I could not comprehend. She suffered me to take
her hand, however, and to lead her unresisting to the weather rail.

“What is it you have to say?” she asked me in her turn. “What is it that
you--think?”

Her voice fell as though she must have the truth.

“That we have all a very good chance,” said I heartily.

“Is that all?” cried Eva, and my heart sank at her eager manner.

She seemed at once disappointed and relieved. Could it be possible she
dreaded a declaration which she had foreseen all along? My evil first
experience rose up to warn me. No, I would not speak now; it was no
time. If she loved me, it might make her love me less; better to trust
to God to spare us both.

“Yes, it is all,” I said doggedly.

She drew a little nearer, hesitating. It was as though her
disappointment had gained on her relief.

“Do you know what I thought you were going to say?”

“No, indeed.”

“Dare I tell you?”

“You can trust me.”

Her pale lips parted. Her great eyes shone. Another instant, and she had
told me that which I would have given all but life itself to know. But
in that tick of time a quick step came behind me, and the light went out
of the sweet face upturned to mine.

“I cannot! I must not! Here is--that man!”

Senhor Santos was all smiles and rings of pale-blue smoke.

“You will be cut off, friend Cole,” said he. “The fire is spreading.”

“Let it spread!” I cried, gazing my very soul into the young girl's
eyes. “We have not finished our conversation.

“We have!” said she, with sudden decision. “Go--go--for my sake--for
your own sake--go at once!”

She gave me her hand. I merely clasped it. And so I left her at the
rail-ah, heaven! how often we had argued on that very spot! So I left
her, with the greatest effort of all my life (but one); and yet in
passing, full as my heart was of love and self, I could not but lay a
hand on poor Ready's shoulders.

“God bless you, old boy!” I said to him.

He turned a white face that gave me half an instant's pause.

“It's all over with me this time,” he said. “But, I say, I was right
about the cargo?”

And I heard a chuckle as I reached the ladder; but Ready was no longer
in my mind; even Eva was driven out of it, as I stood aghast on the
top-most rung.




CHAPTER III. TO THE WATER'S EDGE


It was not the new panic amidships that froze my marrow; it was not that
the pinnace hung perpendicularly by the fore-tackle, and had shot out
those who had swarmed aboard her before she was lowered, as a cart
shoots a load of bricks. It was bad enough to see the whole boat-load
struggling, floundering, sinking in the sea; for selfish eyes (and which
of us is all unselfish at such a time?) there was a worse sight yet; for
I saw all this across an impassable gulf of fire.

The quarter-deck had caught: it was in flames to port and starboard of
the flaming hatch; only fore and aft of it was the deck sound to the
lips of that hideous mouth, with the hundred tongues shooting out and
up.

Could I jump it there? I sprang down and looked. It was only a few feet
across; but to leap through that living fire was to leap into eternity.
I drew back instantly, less because my heart failed me, I may truly say,
than because my common sense did not.

Some were watching me, it seemed, across this hell. “The bulwarks!” they
screamed. “Walk along the bulwarks!” I held up my hand in token that
I heard and understood and meant to act. And as I did their bidding I
noticed what indeed had long been apparent to idler eyes: the wind was
not; we had lost our southeast trades; the doomed ship was rolling in a
dead calm.

Rolling, rolling, rolling so that it seemed minutes before I dared to
move an inch. Then I tried it on my hands and knees, but the scorched
bulwarks burned me to the bone. And then I leapt up, desperate with the
pain; and, with my tortured hands spread wide to balance me, I walked
those few yards, between rising sea and falling fire, and falling sea
and rising fire, as an acrobat walks a rope, and by God's grace without
mishap.

There was no time to think twice about my feat, or, indeed, about
anything else that befell upon a night when each moment was more
pregnant than the last. And yet I did think that those who had
encouraged me to attempt so perilous a trick might have welcomed me
alive among them; they were looking at something else already; and this
was what it was.

One of the cabin stewards had presented himself on the poop; he had a
bottle in one hand, a glass in the other; in the red glare we saw
him dancing in front of the captain like an unruly marionette. Harris
appeared to threaten him. What he said we could not hear for the
deep-drawn blast and the high staccato crackle of the blazing hold. But
we saw the staggering steward offering him a drink; saw the glass flung
next instant in the captain's face, the blood running, a pistol drawn,
fired without effect, and snatched away by the drunken mutineer. Next
instant a smooth black cane was raining blow after blow on the man's
head. He dropped; the blows fell thick and heavy as before. He lay
wriggling; the Portuguese struck and struck until he lay quite still;
then we saw Joaquin Santos kneel, and rub his stick carefully on the
still thing's clothes, as a man might wipe his boots.

Curses burst from our throats; yet the fellow deserved to die. Nor, as I
say, had we time to waste two thoughts upon any one incident. This
last had begun and ended in the same minute; in another we were at the
starboard gangway, tumbling helter-skelter aboard the lowered long-boat.

She lay safely on the water: how we thanked our gods for that! Lower and
lower sank her gunwale as we dropped aboard her, with no more care than
the Gadarene swine whose fate we courted. Discipline, order, method,
common care, we brought none of these things with us from our floating
furnace; but we fought to be first over the bulwarks, and in the bottom
of the long-boat we fought again.

And yet she held us all! All, that is, but a terror-stricken few, who
lay along the jibboom like flies upon a stick: all but two or three more
whom we left fatally hesitating in the forechains: all but the selfish
savages who had been the first to perish in the pinnace, and one
distracted couple who had thrown their children into the kindly ocean,
and jumped in after them out of their torment, locked for ever in each
other's arms.

Yes! I saw more things on that starry night, by that blood-red glare,
than I have told you in their order, and more things than I shall tell
you now. Blind would I gladly be for my few remaining years, if that
night's horrors could be washed from these eyes for ever. I have said so
much, however, that in common candor I must say one thing more. I have
spoken of selfish savages. God help me and forgive me! For by this time
I was one myself.

In the long-boat we cannot have been less than thirty; the exact number
no man will ever know. But we shoved off without mischance; the chief
mate had the tiller; the third mate the boat-hook; and six or eight
oars were at work, in a fashion, as we plunged among the great smooth
sickening mounds and valleys of fathomless ink.

Scarcely were we clear when the foremast dropped down on the fastenings,
dashing the jib-boom into the water with its load of demented human
beings. The mainmast followed by the board before we had doubled our
distance from the wreck. Both trailed to port, where we could not see
them; and now the mizzen stood alone in sad and solitary grandeur, her
flapping idle sails lighted up by the spreading conflagration, so that
they were stamped very sharply upon the black add starry sky. But the
whole scene from the long-boat was one of startling brilliancy and
horror. The fire now filled the entire waist of the vessel, and the
noise of it was as the rumble and roar of a volcano. As for the light,
I declare that it put many a star clean out, and dimmed the radiance
of all the rest, as it flooded the sea for miles around, and a sea of
molten glass reflected it. My gorge rose at the long, low billows-sleek
as black satin--lifting and dipping in this ghastly glare. I preferred
to keep my eyes upon the little ship burning like a tar barrel as the
picture grew. But presently I thanked God aloud: there was the gig
swimming like a beetle over the bloodshot rollers in our wake.

In our unspeakable gladness at being quit of the ship, some minutes
passed before we discovered that the long-boat was slowly filling. The
water was at our ankles before a man of us cried out, so fast were our
eyes to the poor lost Lady Jermyn. Then all at once the ghastly fact
dawned upon us; and I think it was the mate himself who burst out crying
like a child. I never ascertained, however, for I had kicked off my
shoes and was busy baling with them. Others were hunting for the leak.
But the mischief was as subtle as it was mortal--as though a plank
had started from end to end. Within and without the waters rose
equally--then lay an instant level with our gunwales--then swamped us,
oh! so slowly, that I thought we were never going to sink. It was
like getting inch by inch into your tub; I can feel it now, creeping,
crawling up my back. “It's coming! O Christ!” muttered one as it came;
to me it was a downright relief to be carried under at last.

But then, thank God, I have always been a strong swimmer. The water was
warm and buoyant, and I came up like a cork, as I knew I should. I shook
the drops from my face, and there were the sweet stars once more; for
many an eye they had gone Out for ever; and there the burning wreck.

A man floundered near me, in a splutter of phosphorescence. I tried to
help him, and in an instant he had me wildly round the neck. In the end
I shook him off, poor devil, to his death. And he was the last I tried
to aid: have I not said already what I was become?

In a little an oar floated my way: I threw my arms across it and gripped
it with my chin as I swam. It relieved me greatly. Up and down I rode
among the oily black hillocks; I was down when there was a sudden flare
as though the sun had risen, and I saw still a few heads bobbing and a
few arms waving frantically around me. At the same instant a terrific
detonation split the ears; and when I rose on the next bald billow,
where the ship lay burning a few seconds before, there remained but a
red-hot spine that hissed and dwindled for another minute, and then left
a blackness through which every star shone with redoubled brilliance.

And now right and left splashed falling missiles; a new source of danger
or of temporary respite; to me, by a merciful Providence, it proved the
latter.

Some heavy thing fell with a mighty splash right in front of me. A few
more yards, and my brains had floated with the spume. As it was, the
oar was dashed from under my armpits; in another moment they had found a
more solid resting-place.

It was a hen-coop, and it floated bars upwards like a boat. In this
calm it might float for days. I climbed upon the bars-and the whole cage
rolled over on top of me.

Coming to the surface, I found to my joy that the hen-coop had righted
itself; so now I climbed up again, but this time very slowly and
gingerly; the balance was undisturbed, and I stretched myself cautiously
along the bars on my stomach. A good idea immediately occurred to me. I
had jumped as a matter of course into the flannels which one naturally
wears in the tropics. To their lightness I already owed my life, but the
common cricket-belt which was part of the costume was the thing to which
I owe it most of all. Loosening this belt a little, as I tucked my toes
tenaciously under the endmost bar, I undid and passed the two ends under
one of the middle bars, fastening the clasp upon the other side. If I
capsized now, well, we might go to the bottom together; otherwise the
hen-coop and I should not part company in a hurry; and I thought, I
felt, that she would float.

Worn out as I was, and comparatively secure for the moment, I will not
say that I slept; but my eyes closed, and every fibre rested, as I rose
and slid with the smooth, long swell. Whether I did indeed hear voices,
curses, cries, I cannot say positively to this day. I only know that I
raised my head and looked sharply all ways but the way I durst not look
for fear of an upset. And, again, I thought I saw first a tiny flame,
and then a tinier glow; and as my head drooped, and my eyes closed
again, I say I thought I smelt tobacco; but this, of course, was my
imagination supplying all the links from one.






CHAPTER IV. THE SILENT SEA


Remember (if indeed there be any need to remind you) that it is a
flagrant landsman who is telling you this tale. Nothing know I of
seamanship, save what one could not avoid picking up on the round voyage
of the Lady Jermyn, never to be completed on this globe. I may be told
that I have burned that devoted vessel as nothing ever burned on land or
sea. I answer that I write of what I saw, and that is not altered by a
miscalled spar or a misunderstood manouvre. But now I am aboard a craft
I handle for myself, and must make shift to handle a second time with
this frail pen.

The hen-coop was some six feet long, by eighteen or twenty inches in
breadth and depth. It was simply a long box with bars in lieu of a lid;
but it was very strongly built.

I recognized it as one of two which had stood lashed against either rail
of the Lady Jermyn's poop; there the bars had risen at right angles to
the deck; now they lay horizontal, a gridiron six feet long-and my bed.
And as each particular bar left its own stripe across my wearied body,
and yet its own comfort in my quivering heart, another day broke over
the face of the waters, and over me.

Discipline, what there was of it originally, had been the very first
thing to perish aboard our ill-starred ship; the officers, I am afraid,
were not much better than poor Ready made them out (thanks to Bendigo
and Ballarat), and little had been done in true ship-shape style all
night. All hands had taken their spell at everything as the fancy seized
them; not a bell had been struck from first to last; and I can only
conjecture that the fire raged four or five hours, from the fact that
it was midnight by my watch when I left it on my cabin drawers, and that
the final extinction of the smouldering keel was so soon followed by the
first deep hint of dawn. The rest took place with the trite rapidity of
the equatorial latitudes. It had been my foolish way to pooh-pooh the
old saying that there is no twilight in the tropics. I saw more truth in
it as I lay lonely on this heaving waste.

The stars were out; the sea was silver; the sun was up.

And oh! the awful glory of that sunrise! It was terrific; it was
sickening; my senses swam. Sunlit billows smooth and sinister, without a
crest, without a sound; miles and miles of them as I rose; an oily grave
among them as I fell. Hill after hill of horror, valley after valley of
despair! The face of the waters in petty but eternal unrest; and now
the sun must shine to set it smiling, to show me its cruel ceaseless
mouthings, to reveal all but the ghastlier horrors underneath.

How deep was it? I fell to wondering! Not that it makes any difference
whether you drown in one fathom or in ten thousand, whether you fall
from a balloon or from the attic window. But the greater depth or
distance is the worse to contemplate; and I was as a man hanging by his
hands so high above the world, that his dangling feet cover countries,
continents; a man who must fall very soon, and wonders how long he will
be falling, falling; and how far his soul will bear his body company.

In time I became more accustomed to the sun upon this heaving void; less
frightened, as a child is frightened, by the mere picture. And I have
still the impression that, as hour followed hour since the falling of
the wind, the nauseous swell in part subsided. I seemed less often on
an eminence or in a pit; my glassy azure dales had gentler slopes, or a
distemper was melting from my eyes.

At least I know that I had now less work to keep my frail ship trim,
though this also may have come by use and practice. In the beginning one
or other of my legs had been for ever trailing in the sea, to keep the
hen-coop from rolling over the other way; in fact, as I understand they
steer the toboggan in Canada, so I my little bark. Now the necessity for
this was gradually decreasing; whatever the cause, it was the greatest
mercy the day had brought me yet. With less strain on the attention,
however, there was more upon the mind. No longer forced to exert some
muscle twice or thrice a minute, I had time to feel very faint, and yet
time to think. My soul flew homing to its proper prison. I was no longer
any unit at unequal strife with the elements; instincts common to my
kind were no longer my only stimulus. I was my poor self again; it was
my own little life, and no other, that I wanted to go on living; and
yet I felt vaguely there was some special thing I wished to live for,
something that had not been very long in my ken; something that had
perhaps nerved and strengthened me all these hours. What, then, could it
be? I could not think.

For moments or for minutes I wondered stupidly, dazed as I was. Then
I remembered--and the tears gushed to my eyes. How could I ever have
forgotten? I deserved it all, all, all! To think that many a time we
must have sat together on this very coop! I kissed its blistering edge
at the thought, and my tears ran afresh, as though they never would
stop.

Ah! how I thought of her as that cruel day's most cruel sun climbed
higher and higher in the flawless flaming vault. A pocket-handkerchief
of all things had remained in my trousers pocket through fire and water;
I knotted it on the old childish plan, and kept it ever drenched upon
the head that had its own fever to endure as well. Eva Denison! Eva
Denison! I was talking to her in the past, I was talking to her in the
future, and oh! how different were the words, the tone! Yes, I hated
myself for having forgotten her; but I hated God for having given her
back to my tortured brain; it made life so many thousandfold more sweet,
and death so many thousandfold more bitter.

She was saved in the gig. Sweet Jesus, thanks for that! But I--I was
dying a lingering death in mid-ocean; she would never know how I loved
her, I, who could only lecture her when I had her at my side.

Dying? No--no--not yet! I must live--live--live--to tell my darling how
I had loved her all the time. So I forced myself from my lethargy of
despair and grief; and this thought, the sweetest thought of all my
life, may or may not have been my unrealized stimulus ere now; it was in
very deed my most conscious and perpetual spur henceforth until the end.

From this onward, while my sense stood by me, I was practical,
resourceful, alert. It was now high-noon, and I had eaten nothing since
dinner the night before. How clearly I saw the long saloon table, only
laid, however, abaft the mast; the glittering glass, the cool white
napery, the poor old dried dessert in the green dishes! Earlier, this
had occupied my mind an hour; now I dismissed it in a moment; there was
Eva, I must live for her; there must be ways of living at least a day or
two without sustenance, and I must think of them.

So I undid that belt of mine which fastened me to my gridiron, and I
straddled my craft with a sudden keen eye for sharks, of which I never
once had thought until now. Then I tightened the belt about my hollow
body, and just sat there with the problem. The past hour I had been
wholly unobservant; the inner eye had had its turn; but that was over
now, and I sat as upright as possible, seeking greedily for a sail. Of
course I saw none. Had we indeed been off our course before the fire
broke out? Had we burned to cinders aside and apart from the regular
track of ships? Then, though my present valiant mood might ignore
the adverse chances, they were as one hundred to a single chance of
deliverance. Our burning had brought no ship to our succor; and how
should I, a mere speck amid the waves, bring one to mine?

Moreover, I was all but motionless; I was barely drifting at all. This
I saw from a few objects which were floating around me now at noon; they
had been with me when the high sun rose. One was, I think, the very
oar which had been my first support; another was a sailor's cap; but
another, which floated nearer, was new to me, as though it had come to
the surface while my eyes were turned inwards. And this was clearly the
case; for the thing was a drowned and bloated corpse.

It fascinated me, though not with extraordinary horror; it came too late
to do that. I thought I recognized the man's back. I fancied it was
the mate who had taken charge of the long-boat. Was I then the single
survivor of those thirty souls? I was still watching my poor lost
comrade, when that happened to him against which even I was not proof.
Through the deep translucent blue beneath me a slim shape glided; three
smaller fish led the way; they dallied an instant a fathom under my
feet, which were snatched up, with what haste you may imagine; then on
they went to surer prey.

He turned over; his dreadful face stared upwards; it was the chief
officer, sure enough. Then he clove the water with a rush, his dead hand
waved, the last of him to disappear; and I had a new horror to think
over for my sins. His poor fingers were all broken and beaten to a pulp.

The voices of the night came back to me--the curses and the cries. Yes,
I must have heard them. In memory now I recognized the voice of the
chief mate, but there again came in the assisted imagination. Yet I
was not so sure of this as before. I thought of Santos and his horrible
heavy cane. Good God! she was in the power of that! I must live for Eva
indeed; must save myself to save and protect my innocent and helpless
girl.

Again I was a man; stronger than ever was the stimulus now, louder than
ever the call on every drop of true man's blood in my perishing frame.
It should not perish! It should not!

Yet my throat was parched; my lips were caked; my frame was hollow. Very
weak I was already; without sustenance I should surely die. But as yet
I was far enough from death, or I had done disdaining the means of life
that all this time lay ready to my hand. A number of dead fowls imparted
ballast to my little craft.

Yet I could not look at them in all these hours; or I could look, but
that was all. So I must sit up one hour more, and keep a sharper eye
than ever for the tiniest glimmer of a sail. To what end, I often asked
myself? I might see them; they would never see me.

Then my eyes would fail, and “you squeamish fool!” I said at intervals,
until my tongue failed to articulate; it had swollen so in my mouth.
Flying fish skimmed the water like thick spray; petrels were so few that
I could count them; another shark swam round me for an hour. In sudden
panic I dashed my knuckles on the wooden bars, to get at a duck to give
the monster for a sop. My knuckles bled. I held them to my mouth. My
cleaving tongue wanted more. The duck went to the shark; a few minutes
more and I had made my own vile meal as well.




CHAPTER V. MY REWARD


The sun declined; my shadow broadened on die waters; and now I felt that
if my cockle-shell could live a little longer, why, so could I.

I had got at the fowls without further hurt. Some of the bars took out,
I discovered how. And now very carefully I got my legs in, and knelt;
but the change of posture was not worth the risk one ran for it; there
was too much danger of capsizing, and failing to free oneself before she
filled and sank.

With much caution I began breaking the bars, one by one; it was hard
enough, weak as I was; my thighs were of more service than my hands.

But at last I could sit, the grating only covering me from the knees
downwards. And the relief of that outweighed all the danger, which, as I
discovered to my untold joy, was now much less than it had been before.
I was better ballast than the fowls.

These I had attached to the lashings which had been blown asunder by the
explosion; at one end of the coop the ring-bolt had been torn clean out,
but at the other it was the cordage that had parted. To the frayed
ends I tied my fowls by the legs, with the most foolish pride in my own
cunning. Do you not see? It would keep them fresh for my use, and it was
a trick I had read of in no book; it was all my own.

So evening fell and found me hopeful and even puffed up; but yet, no
sail.

Now, however, I could lie back, and use had given me a strange sense of
safety; besides, I think I knew, I hope I felt, that the hen-coop was in
other Hands than mine.

All is reaction in the heart of man; light follows darkness nowhere more
surely than in that hidden self, and now at sunset it was my heart's
high-noon. Deep peace pervaded me as I lay outstretched in my narrow
rocking bed, as it might be in my coffin; a trust in my Maker's will
to save me if that were for the best, a trust in His final wisdom and
loving-kindness, even though this night should be my last on earth. For
myself I was resigned, and for others I must trust Him no less. Who was
I to constitute myself the protector of the helpless, when He was in
His Heaven? Such was my sunset mood; it lasted a few minutes, and then,
without radically changing, it became more objective.

The west was a broadening blaze of yellow and purple and red. I cannot
describe it to you. If you have seen the sun set in the tropics, you
would despise my description; and, if not, I for one could never make
you see it. Suffice it that a petrel wheeled somewhere between deepening
carmine and paling blue, and it took my thoughts off at an earthy
tangent. I thanked God there were no big sea-birds in these latitudes;
no molly-hawks, no albatrosses, no Cape-hens. I thought of an albatross
that I had caught going out. Its beak and talons were at the bottom
with the charred remains of the Lady Jermyn. But I could see them
still, could feel them shrewdly in my mind's flesh; and so to the old
superstition, strangely justified by my case; and so to the poem which
I, with my special experience, not unnaturally consider the greatest
poem ever penned.

But I did not know it then as I do now--and how the lines eluded me! I
seemed to see them in the book, yet I could not read the words!

             “Water, water, everywhere,
              Nor any drop to drink.”

That, of course, came first (incorrectly); and it reminded me of my
thirst, which the blood of the fowls had so very partially appeased. I
see now that it is lucky I could recall but little more. Experience is
less terrible than realization, and that poem makes me realize what I
went through as memory cannot. It has verses which would have driven me
mad. On the other hand, the exhaustive mental search for them distracted
my thoughts until the stars were back in the sky; and now I had a new
occupation, saying to myself all the poetry I could remember, especially
that of the sea; for I was a bookish fellow even then. But I never
was anything of a scholar. It is odd therefore, that the one apposite
passage which recurred to me in its entirety was in hexameters and
pentameters:

   Me miserum, quanti montes volvuntur aquarum!
   Jam jam tacturos sidera summa putes.
   Quantae diducto subsidunt aequore valles!
   Jam jam tacturas Tartara nigra putes.
   Quocunque adspicio, nihil est nisi pontus et aether;
   Fluctibus hic tumidis, nubibus ille minax....

More there was of it in my head; but this much was an accurate statement
of my case; and yet less so now (I was thankful to reflect) than in
the morning, when every wave was indeed a mountain, and its trough a
Tartarus. I had learnt the lines at school; nay, they had formed my very
earliest piece of Latin repetition. And how sharply I saw the room I
said them in, the man I said them to, ever since my friend! I figured
him even now hearing Ovid rep., the same passage in the same room. And I
lay saying it on a hen-coop in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean!

At last I fell into a deep sleep, a long unconscious holiday of the
soul, undefiled by any dream.

They say that our dreaming is done as we slowly wake; then was I out of
the way of it that night, for a sudden violent rocking awoke me in
one horrid instant. I made it worse by the way I started to a sitting
posture. I had shipped some water. I was shipping more. Yet all around
the sea was glassy; whence then the commotion? As my ship came trim
again, and I saw that my hour was not yet, the cause occurred to me; and
my heart turned so sick that it was minutes before I had the courage to
test my theory.

It was the true one.

A shark had been at my trailing fowls; had taken the bunch of them
together, dragging the legs from my loose fastenings. Lucky they had
been no stronger! Else had I been dragged down to perdition too.

Lucky, did I say? The refinement of cruelty rather; for now I had
neither meat nor drink; my throat was a kiln; my tongue a flame; and
another day at hand.

The stars were out; the sea was silver; the sun was up!

         .        .         .         .         .

Hours passed.

I was waiting now for my delirium.

It came in bits.

I was a child. I was playing on the lawn at home. I was back on the
blazing sea.

I was a schoolboy saying my Ovid; then back once more.

The hen-coop was the Lady Jermyn. I was at Eva Denison's side. They were
marrying us on board. The ship's bell was ringing for us; a guitar in
the background burlesqued the Wedding March under skinny fingers; the
air was poisoned by a million cigarettes, they raised a pall of smoke
above the mastheads, they set fire to the ship; smoke and flame covered
the sea from rim to rim, smoke and flame filled the universe; the sea
dried up, and I was left lying in its bed, lying in my coffin, with
red-hot teeth, because the sun blazed right above them, and my withered
lips were drawn back from them for ever.

So once more I came back to my living death; too weak now to carry a
finger to the salt water and back to my mouth; too weak to think of Eva;
too weak to pray any longer for the end, to trouble or to care any more.

Only so tired.

         .         .         .         .         .

Death has no more terrors for me. I have supped the last horror of the
worst death a man can die. You shall hear now for what I was delivered;
you shall read of my reward.

My floating coffin was many things in turn; a railway carriage, a
pleasure boat on the Thames, a hammock under the trees; last of all it
was the upper berth in a not very sweet-smelling cabin, with a clatter
of knives and forks near at hand, and a very strong odor of onions in
the Irish stew.

My hand crawled to my head; both felt a wondrous weight; and my head
was covered with bristles no longer than those on my chin, only less
stubborn.

“Where am I?” I feebly asked.

The knives and forks clattered on, and presently I burst out crying
because they had not heard me, and I knew that I could never make them
hear. Well, they heard my sobs, and a huge fellow came with his mouth
full, and smelling like a pickle bottle.

“Where am I?”

“Aboard the brig Eliza, Liverpool, homeward bound; glad to see them eyes
open.”

“Have I been here long?”

“Matter o' ten days.”

“Where did you find me?”

“Floating in a hen-coop; thought you was a dead 'un.”

“Do you know what ship?”

“Do we know? No, that's what you've got to tell us!”

“I can't,” I sighed, too weak to wag my head upon the pillow.

The man went to my cabin door.

“Here's a go,” said he; “forgotten the name of his blessed ship, he has.
Where's that there paper, Mr. Bowles? There's just a chance it may be
the same.”

“I've got it, sir.”

“Well, fetch it along, and come you in, Mr. Bowles; likely you may think
o' somethin'.”

A reddish, hook-nosed man, with a jaunty, wicked look, came and smiled
upon me in the friendliest fashion; the smell of onions became more than
I knew how to endure.

“Ever hear of the ship Lady Jermyn?” asked the first corner, winking at
the other.

I thought very hard, the name did sound familiar; but no, I could not
honestly say that I had beard it before.

The captain looked at his mate.

“It was a thousand to one,” said he; “still we may as well try him with
the other names. Ever heard of Cap'n Harris, mister?”

“Not that I know of.”

“Of Saunderson-stooard?”

“No.”

“Or Crookes-quartermaster.”

“Never.”

“Nor yet of Ready--a passenger?”

“No.”

“It's no use goin' on,” said the captain folding up the paper.

“None whatever, sir,” said the mate

“Ready! Ready!” I repeated. “I do seem to have heard that name before.
Won't you give me another chance?”

The paper was unfolded with a shrug.

“There was another passenger of the name of San-Santos. Dutchman,
seemin'ly. Ever heard o' him?”

My disappointment was keen. I could not say that I had. Yet I would not
swear that I had not.

“Oh, won't you? Well, there's only one more chance. Ever heard of Miss
Eva Denison--”

“By God, yes! Have you?”

I was sitting bolt upright in my bunk. The skipper's beard dropped upon
his chest.

“Bless my soul! The last name o' the lot, too!”

“Have you heard of her?” I reiterated.

“Wait a bit, my lad! Not so fast. Lie down again and tell me who she
was.”

“Who she was?” I screamed. “I want to know where she is!”

“I can't hardly say,” said the captain awkwardly. “We found the gig o'
the Lady Jermyn the week arter we found you, bein' becalmed like; there
wasn't no lady aboard her, though.”

“Was there anybody?”

“Two dead 'uns--an' this here paper.”

“Let me see it!”

The skipper hesitated.

“Hadn't you better wait a bit?”

“No, no; for Christ's sake let me see the worst; do you think I can't
read it in your face?”

I could--I did. I made that plain to them, and at last I had the
paper smoothed out upon my knees. It was a short statement of the last
sufferings of those who had escaped in the gig, and there was nothing
in it that I did not now expect. They had buried Ready first--then my
darling--then her step-father. The rest expected to follow fast enough.
It was all written plainly, on a sheet of the log-book, in different
trembling hands. Captain Harris had gone next; and two had been
discovered dead.

How long I studied that bit of crumpled paper, with the salt spray
still sparkling on it faintly, God alone knows. All at once a peal of
nightmare laughter rattled through the cabin. My deliverers started
back. The laugh was mine.




CHAPTER VI. THE SOLE SURVIVOR


A few weeks later I landed in England, I, who no longer desired to set
foot on any land again.

At nine-and-twenty I was gaunt and gray; my nerves were shattered, my
heart was broken; and my face showed it without let or hindrance from
the spirit that was broken too. Pride, will, courage, and endurance, all
these had expired in my long and lonely battle with the sea. They had
kept me alive-for this. And now they left me naked to mine enemies.

For every hand seemed raised against me, though in reality it was the
hand of fellowship that the world stretched out, and the other was the
reading of a jaundiced eye. I could not help it: there was a poison in
my veins that made me all ingratitude and perversity. The world welcomed
me back, and I returned the compliment by sulking like the recaptured
runaway I was at heart. The world showed a sudden interest in me; so I
took no further interest in the world, but, on the contrary, resented
its attentions with unreasonable warmth and obduracy; and my would-be
friends I regarded as my very worst enemies. The majority, I feel sure,
meant but well and kindly by the poor survivor. But the survivor could
not forget that his name was still in the newspapers, nor blink the fact
that he was an unworthy hero of the passing hour. And he suffered
enough from brazenly meddlesome and self-seeking folk, from impudent and
inquisitive intruders, to justify some suspicion of old acquaintances
suddenly styling themselves old friends, and of distant connections
newly and unduly eager to claim relationship. Many I misjudged, and have
long known it. On the whole, however, I wonder at that attitude of mine
as little as I approve of it.

If I had distinguished myself in any other way, it would have been a
different thing. It was the fussy, sentimental, inconsiderate
interest in one thrown into purely accidental and necessarily painful
prominence--the vulgarization of an unspeakable tragedy--that my soul
abhorred. I confess that I regarded it from my own unique and selfish
point of view. What was a thrilling matter to the world was a torturing
memory to me. The quintessence of the torture was, moreover, my own
secret. It was not the loss of the Lady Jermyn that I could not bear to
speak about; it was my own loss; but the one involved the other. My
loss apart, however, it was plain enough to dwell upon experiences so
terrible and yet so recent as those which I had lived to tell. I did
what I considered my duty to the public, but I certainly did no more. My
reticence was rebuked in the papers that made the most of me, but would
fain have made more. And yet I do not think that I was anything but
docile with those who had a manifest right to question me; to the
owners, and to other interested persons, with whom I was confronted on
one pretext or another, I told my tale as fully and as freely as I have
told it here, though each telling hurt more than the last. That was
necessary and unavoidable; it was the private intrusions which I
resented with all the spleen the sea had left me in exchange for the
qualities it had taken away.

Relatives I had as few as misanthropist could desire; but from
self-congratulation on the fact, on first landing, I soon came to keen
regret. They at least would have sheltered me from spies and busybodies;
they at least would have secured the peace and privacy of one who was
no hero in fact or spirit, whose noblest deed was a piece of self
preservation which he wished undone with all his heart.

Self-consciousness no doubt multiplied my flattering assailants. I
have said that my nerves were shattered. I may have imagined much and
exaggerated the rest. Yet what truth there was in my suspicions you
shall duly see. I felt sure that I was followed in the street, and my
every movement dogged by those to whom I would not condescend to turn
and look. Meanwhile, I had not the courage to go near my club, and
the Temple was a place where I was accosted in every court, effusively
congratulated on the marvellous preservation of my stale spoilt life,
and invited right and left to spin my yarn over a quiet pipe! Well,
perhaps such invitations were not so common as they have grown in my
memory; nor must you confuse my then feelings on all these matters with
those which I entertain as I write. I have grown older, and, I hope,
something kindlier and wiser since then. Yet to this day I cannot blame
myself for abandoning my chambers and avoiding my club.

For a temporary asylum I pitched upon a small, quiet, empty, private
hotel which I knew of in Charterhouse Square. Instantly the room next
mine became occupied.

All the first night I imagined I heard voices talking about me in that
room next door. It was becoming a disease with me. Either I was being
dogged, watched, followed, day and night, indoors and out, or I was the
victim of a very ominous hallucination. That night I never closed an eye
nor lowered my light. In the morning I took a four-wheel cab and
drove straight to Harley Street; and, upon my soul, as I stood on the
specialist's door-step, I could have sworn I saw the occupant of the
room next mine dash by me in a hansom!

“Ah!” said the specialist; “so you cannot sleep; you hear voices;
you fancy you are being followed in the street. You don't think these
fancies spring entirely from the imagination? Not entirely--just so. And
you keep looking behind you, as though somebody were at your elbow; and
you prefer to sit with your back close to the wall. Just so--just so.
Distressing symptoms, to be sure, but--but hardly to be wondered at in a
man who has come through your nervous strain.” A keen professional light
glittered in his eyes. “And almost commonplace,” he added, smiling,
“compared with the hallucinations you must have suffered from on that
hen-coop! Ah, my dear sir, the psychological interest of your case is
very great!”

“It may be,” said I, brusquely. “But I come to you to get that hen-coop
out of my head, not to be reminded of it. Everybody asks me about the
damned thing, and you follow everybody else. I wish it and I were at the
bottom of the sea together!”

This speech had the effect of really interesting the doctor in my
present condition, which was indeed one of chronic irritation and
extreme excitability, alternating with fits of the very blackest
despair. Instead of offending my gentleman I had put him on his mettle,
and for half an hour he honored me with the most exhaustive inquisition
ever elicited from a medical man. His panacea was somewhat in the nature
of an anti-climax, but at least it had the merits of simplicity and
of common sense. A change of air--perfect quiet--say a cottage in the
country--not too near the sea. And he shook my hand kindly when I left.

“Keep up your heart, my dear sir,” said he. “Keep up your courage and
your heart.”

“My heart!” I cried. “It's at the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean.”

He was the first to whom I had said as much. He was a stranger. What did
it matter? And, oh, it was so true--so true.

Every day and all day I was thinking of my love; every hour and all
hours she was before me with her sunny hair and young, young face. Her
wistful eyes were gazing into mine continually. Their wistfulness I
had never realized at the time; but now I did; and I saw it for what it
seemed always to have been, the soft, sad, yearning look of one fated
to die young. So young--so young! And I might live to be an old man,
mourning her.

That I should never love again I knew full well. This time there was no
mistake. I have implied, I believe, that it was for another woman I fled
originally to the diggings. Well, that one was still unmarried, and when
the papers were full of me she wrote me a letter which I now believe to
have been merely kind. At the time I was all uncharitableness; but words
of mine would fail to tell you how cold this letter left me; it was as a
candle lighted in the full blaze of the sun.

With all my bitterness, however, you must not suppose that I had quite
lost the feelings which had inspired me at sunset on the lonely ocean,
while my mind still held good. I had been too near my Maker ever to lose
those feelings altogether. They were with me in the better moments of
these my worst days. I trusted His wisdom still. There was a reason for
everything; there were reasons for all this. I alone had been saved out
of all those souls who sailed from Melbourne in the Lady Jermyn. Why
should I have been the favored one; I with my broken heart and now
lonely life? Some great inscrutable reason there must be; at my worst
I did not deny that. But neither did I puzzle my sick brain with the
reason. I just waited for it to be revealed to me, if it were God's will
ever to reveal it. And that I conceive to be the one spirit in which a
man may contemplate, with equal sanity and reverence, the mysteries and
the miseries of his life.




CHAPTER VII. I FIND A FRIEND



The night after I consulted the specialist I was quite determined to
sleep. I had laid in a bundle of the daily papers. No country cottage
was advertised to let but I knew of it by evening, and about all the
likely ones I had already written. The scheme occupied my thoughts.
Trout-fishing was a desideratum. I would take my rod and plenty of
books, would live simply and frugally, and it should make a new man of
me by Christmas. It was now October. I went to sleep thinking of autumn
tints against an autumn sunset. It must have been very early, certainly
not later than ten o'clock; the previous night I had not slept at all.

Now, this private hotel of mine was a very old fashioned house, dark and
dingy all day long, with heavy old chandeliers and black old oak, and
dead flowers in broken flower-pots surrounding a grimy grass-plot in the
rear. On this latter my bedroom window looked; and never am I likely to
forget the vile music of the cats throughout my first long wakeful night
there. The second night they actually woke me; doubtless they had been
busy long enough, but it was all of a sudden that I heard them, and lay
listening for more, wide awake in an instant. My window had been very
softly opened, and the draught fanned my forehead as I held my breath.

A faint light glimmered through a ground-glass pane over the door; and
was dimly reflected by the toilet mirror, in its usual place against the
window. This mirror I saw moved, and next moment I had bounded from bed.

The mirror fell with a horrid clatter: the toilet-table followed it with
a worse: the thief had gone as he had come ere my toes halted aching
amid the debris.

A useless little balcony--stone slab and iron railing--jutted out from
my window. I thought I saw a hand on the railing, another on the slab,
then both together on the lower level for one instant before they
disappeared. There was a dull yet springy thud on the grass below. Then
no more noise but the distant thunder of the traffic, and the one that
woke me, until the window next mine was thrown up.

“What the devil's up?”

The voice was rich, cheery, light-hearted, agreeable; all that my own
was not as I answered “Nothing!” for this was not the first time my
next-door neighbor had tried to scrape acquaintance with me.

“But surely, sir, I heard the very dickens of a row?”

“You may have done.”

“I was afraid some one had broken into your room!”

“As a matter of fact,” said I, put to shame by the undiminished
good-humor of my neighbor, “some one did; but he's gone now, so let him
be.”

“Gone? Not he! He's getting over that wall. After him--after him!” And
the head disappeared from the window next mine.

I rushed into the corridor, and was just in time to intercept a
singularly handsome young fellow, at whom I had hardly taken the trouble
to look until now. He was in full evening dress, and his face was
radiant with the spirit of mischief and adventure.

“For God's sake, sir,” I whispered, “let this matter rest. I shall have
to come forward if you persist, and Heaven knows I have been before the
public quite enough!”

His dark eyes questioned me an instant, then fell as though he would not
disguise that he recollected and understood. I liked him for his good
taste. I liked him for his tacit sympathy, and better still for the
amusing disappointment in his gallant, young face.

“I am sorry to have robbed you of a pleasant chase,” said I. “At one
time I should have been the first to join you. But, to tell you the
truth, I've had enough excitement lately to last me for my life.”

“I can believe that,” he answered, with his fine eyes full upon me.
How strangely I had misjudged him! I saw no vulgar curiosity in his
flattering gaze, but rather that very sympathy of which I stood in need.
I offered him my hand.

“It is very good of you to give in,” I said. “No one else has heard a
thing, you see. I shall look for another opportunity of thanking you
to-morrow.”

“No, no!” cried he, “thanks be hanged, but--but, I say, if I promise
you not to bore you about things--won't you drink a glass of
brandy-and-water in my room before you turn in again?”

Brandy-and-water being the very thing I needed, and this young man
pleasing me more and more, I said that I would join him with all my
heart, and returned to my room for my dressing-gown and slippers. To
find them, however, I had to light my candles, when the first thing
I saw was the havoc my marauder had left behind him. The mirror was
cracked across; the dressing-table had lost a leg; and both lay flat,
with my brushes and shaving-table, and the foolish toilet crockery which
no one uses (but I should have to replace) strewn upon the carpet. But
one thing I found that had not been there before: under the window lay
a formidable sheath-knife without its sheath. I picked it up with
something of a thrill, which did not lessen when I felt its edge. The
thing was diabolically sharp. I took it with me to show my neighbor,
whom I found giving his order to the boots; it seemed that it was barely
midnight, and that he had only just come in when the clatter took place
in my room.

“Hillo!” he cried, when the man was gone, and I produced my trophy.
“Why, what the mischief have you got there?”

“My caller's card,” said I. “He left it behind him. Feel the edge.”

I have seldom seen a more indignant face than the one which my new
acquaintance bent over the weapon, as he held it to the light, and ran
his finger along the blade. He could have not frowned more heavily if he
had recognized the knife.

“The villains!” he muttered. “The damned villains!”

“Villains?” I queried. “Did you see more than one of them, then?”

“Didn't you?” he asked quickly. “Yes, yes, to be sure! There was at
least one other beggar skulking down below.” He stood looking at me, the
knife in his hand, though mine was held out for it. “Don't you think,
Mr. Cole, that it's our duty to hand this over to the police? I--I've
heard of other cases about these Inns of Court. There's evidently a gang
of them, and this knife might convict the lot; there's no saying; anyway
I think the police should have it. If you like I'll take it to Scotland
Yard myself, and hand it over without mentioning your name.”

“Oh, if you keep my name out of it,” said I, “and say nothing about
it here in the hotel, you may do what you like, and welcome! It's the
proper course, no doubt; only I've had publicity enough, and would
sooner have felt that blade in my body than set my name going again in
the newspapers.”

“I understand,” he said, with his well-bred sympathy, which never went
a shade too far; and he dropped the weapon into a drawer, as the boots
entered with the tray. In a minute he had brewed two steaming jorums of
spirits-and-water; as he handed me one, I feared he was going to drink
my health, or toast my luck; but no, he was the one man I had met who
seemed, as he said, to “understand.” Nevertheless, he had his toast.

“Here's confusion to the criminal classes in general,” he cried; “but
death and damnation to the owners of that knife!”

And we clinked tumblers across the little oval table in the middle of
the room. It was more of a sitting-room than mine; a bright fire was
burning in the grate, and my companion insisted on my sitting over it
in the arm-chair, while for himself he fetched the one from his bedside,
and drew up the table so that our glasses should be handy. He then
produced a handsome cigar-case admirably stocked, and we smoked and
sipped in the cosiest fashion, though without exchanging many words.

You may imagine my pleasure in the society of a youth, equally charming
in looks, manners and address, who had not one word to say to me about
the Lady Jermyn or my hen-coop. It was unique. Yet such, I suppose,
was my native contrariety, that I felt I could have spoken of the
catastrophe to this very boy with less reluctance than to any other
creature whom I had encountered since my deliverance. He seemed so full
of silent sympathy: his consideration for my feelings was so marked and
yet so unobtrusive. I have called him a boy. I am apt to write as the
old man I have grown, though I do believe I felt older then than now.
In any case my young friend was some years my junior. I afterwards found
out that he was six-and-twenty.

I have also called him handsome. He was the handsomest man that I have
ever met, had the frankest face, the finest eyes, the brightest smile.
Yet his bronzed forehead was low, and his mouth rather impudent and bold
than truly strong. And there was a touch of foppery about him, in the
enormous white tie and the much-cherished whiskers of the fifties, which
was only redeemed by that other touch of devilry that he had shown me
in the corridor. By the rich brown of his complexion, as well as by a
certain sort of swagger in his walk, I should have said that he was a
naval officer ashore, had he not told me who he was of his own accord.

“By the way,” he said, “I ought to give you my name. It's Rattray,
of one of the many Kirby Halls in this country. My one's down in
Lancashire.”

“I suppose there's no need to tell my name?” said I, less sadly, I
daresay, than I had ever yet alluded to the tragedy which I alone
survived. It was an unnecessary allusion, too, as a reference to the
foregoing conversation will show.

“Well, no!” said he, in his frank fashion; “I can't honestly say there
is.”

We took a few puffs, he watching the fire, and I his firelit face.

“It must seem strange to you to be sitting with the only man who lived
to tell the tale!”

The egotism of this speech was not wholly gratuitous. I thought it did
seem strange to him: that a needless constraint was put upon him by
excessive consideration for my feelings. I desired to set him at his
ease as he had set me at mine. On the contrary, he seemed quite startled
by my remark.

“It is strange,” he said, with a shudder, followed by the biggest sip
of brandy-and-water he had taken yet. “It must have been
horrible--horrible!” he added to himself, his dark eyes staring into the
fire.

“Ah!” said I, “it was even more horrible than you suppose or can ever
imagine.”

I was not thinking of myself, nor of my love, nor of any particular
incident of the fire that still went on burning in my brain. My tone was
doubtless confidential, but I was meditating no special confidence when
my companion drew one with his next words. These, however, came after a
pause, in which my eyes had fallen from his face, but in which I heard
him emptying his glass.

“What do you mean?” he whispered. “That there were other
circumstances--things which haven't got into the papers?”

“God knows there were,” I answered, my face in my hands; and, my
grief brought home to me, there I sat with it in the presence of that
stranger, without compunction and without shame.

He sprang up and paced the room. His tact made me realize my weakness,
and I was struggling to overcome it when he surprised me by suddenly
stopping and laying a rather tremulous hand upon my shoulder.

“You--It wouldn't do you any good to speak of those circumstances, I
suppose?” he faltered.

“No: not now: no good at all.”

“Forgive me,” he said, resuming his walk. “I had no business--I felt so
sorry--I cannot tell you how I sympathize! And yet--I wonder if you will
always feel so?”

“No saying how I shall feel when I am a man again,” said I. “You see
what I am at present.” And, pulling myself together, I rose to find my
new friend quite agitated in his turn.

“I wish we had some more brandy,” he sighed. “I'm afraid it's too late
to get any now.”

“And I'm glad of it,” said I. “A man in my state ought not to look at
spirits, or he may never look past them again. Thank goodness, there are
other medicines. Only this morning I consulted the best man on nerves in
London. I wish I'd gone to him long ago.”

“Harley Street, was it?”

“Yes.”

“Saw you on his doorstep, by Jove!” cried Rattray at once. “I was
driving over to Hampstead, and I thought it was you. Well, what's the
prescription?”

In my satisfaction at finding that he had not been dogging me
intentionally (though I had forgotten the incident till he reminded me
of it), I answered his question with unusual fulness.

“I should go abroad,” said Rattray. “But then, I always am abroad; it's
only the other day I got back from South America, and I shall up anchor
again before this filthy English winter sets in.”

Was he a sailor after all, or only a well-to-do wanderer on the face of
the earth? He now mentioned that he was only in England for a few weeks,
to have a look at his estate, and so forth; after which he plunged into
more or less enthusiastic advocacy of this or that foreign resort, as
opposed to the English cottage upon which I told him I had set my heart.

He was now, however, less spontaneous, I thought, than earlier in the
night. His voice had lost its hearty ring, and he seemed preoccupied, as
if talking of one matter while he thought upon another. Yet he would
not let me go; and presently he confirmed my suspicion, no less than my
first impression of his delightful frankness and cordiality, by candidly
telling me what was on his mind.

“If you really want a cottage in the country,” said he, “and the most
absolute peace and quiet to be got in this world, I know of the very
thing on my land in Lancashire. It would drive me mad in a week; but if
you really care for that sort of thing--”

“An occupied cottage?” I interrupted.

“Yes; a couple rent it from me, very decent people of the name of
Braithwaite. The man is out all day, and won't bother you when he's in;
he's not like other people, poor chap. But the woman 's all there, and
would do her best for you in a humble, simple, wholesome sort of way.”

“You think they would take me in?”

“They have taken other men--artists as a rule.”

“Then it's a picturesque country?”

“Oh, it's that if it's nothing else; but not a town for miles, mind you,
and hardly a village worthy the name.”

“Any fishing?”

“Yes--trout--small but plenty of 'em--in a beck running close behind the
cottage.”

“Come,” cried I, “this sounds delightful! Shall you be up there?”

“Only for a day or two,” was the reply. “I shan't trouble you, Mr.
Cole.”

“My dear sir, that wasn't my meaning at all. I'm only sorry I shall not
see something of you on your own heath. I can't thank you enough for
your kind suggestion. When do you suppose the Braithwaites could do with
me?”

His charming smile rebuked my impatience.

“We must first see whether they can do with you at all,” said he. “I
sincerely hope they can; but this is their time of year for tourists,
though perhaps a little late. I'll tell you what I'll do. As a matter
of fact, I'm going down there to-morrow, and I've got to telegraph to my
place in any case to tell them when to meet me. I'll send the telegram
first thing, and I'll make them send one back to say whether there's
room in the cottage or not.”

I thanked him warmly, but asked if the cottage was close to Kirby Hall,
and whether this would not be giving a deal of trouble at the other end;
whereupon he mischievously misunderstood me a second time, saying the
cottage and the hall were not even in sight of each other, and I really
had no intrusion to fear, as he was a lonely bachelor like myself,
and would only be up there four or five days at the most. So I made my
appreciation of his society plainer than ever to him; for indeed I
had found a more refreshing pleasure in it already than I had hoped to
derive from mortal man again; and we parted, at three o'clock in the
morning, like old fast friends.

“Only don't expect too much, my dear Mr. Cole,” were his last words to
me. “My own place is as ancient and as tumble-down as most ruins that
you pay to see over. And I'm never there myself because--I tell you
frankly--I hate it like poison!”




CHAPTER VIII. A SMALL PRECAUTION


My delight in the society of this young Squire Rattray (as I soon was to
hear him styled) had been such as to make me almost forget the sinister
incident which had brought us together. When I returned to my room,
however, there were the open window and the litter on the floor to
remind me of what had happened earlier in the night. Yet I was less
disconcerted than you might suppose. A common housebreaker can have
few terrors for one who has braved those of mid-ocean single-handed; my
would-be visitor had no longer any for me; for it had not yet occurred
to me to connect him with the voices and the footsteps to which, indeed,
I had been unable to swear before the doctor. On the other hand, these
morbid imaginings (as I was far from unwilling to consider them) had
one and all deserted me in the sane, clean company of the capital young
fellow in the next room.

I have confessed my condition up to the time of this queer meeting.
I have tried to bring young Rattray before you with some hint of his
freshness and his boyish charm; and though the sense of failure is heavy
upon me there, I who knew the man knew also that I must fail to do him
justice. Enough may have been said, however, to impart some faint idea
of what this youth was to me in the bitter and embittering anti-climax
of my life. Conventional figures spring to my pen, but every one of them
is true; he was flowers in spring, he was sunshine after rain, he was
rain following long months of drought. I slept admirably after all;
and I awoke to see the overturned toilet-table, and to thrill as I
remembered there was one fellow-creature with whom I could fraternize
without fear of a rude reopening of my every wound.

I hurried my dressing in the hope of our breakfasting together. I
knocked at the next door, and, receiving no answer, even ventured
to enter, with the same idea. He was not there. He was not in the
coffee-room. He was not in the hotel.

I broke my fast in disappointed solitude, and I hung about disconsolate
all the morning, looking wistfully for my new-made friend. Towards
mid-day he drove up in a cab which he kept waiting at the curb.

“It's all right!” he cried out in his hearty way. “I sent my telegram
first thing, and I've had the answer at my club. The rooms are vacant,
and I'll see that Jane Braithwaite has all ready for you by to-morrow
night.”

I thanked him from my heart. “You seem in a hurry!” I added, as I
followed him up the stairs.

“I am,” said he. “It's a near thing for the train. I've just time to
stick in my things.”

“Then I'll stick in mine,” said I impulsively, “and I'll come with you,
and doss down in any corner for the night.”

He stopped and turned on the stairs.

“You mustn't do that,” said he; “they won't have anything ready. I'm
going to make it my privilege to see that everything is as cosey as
possible when you arrive. I simply can't allow you to come to-day, Mr.
Cole!” He smiled, but I saw that he was in earnest, and of course I gave
in.

“All right,” said I; “then I must content myself with seeing you off at
the station.”

To my surprise his smile faded, and a flush of undisguised annoyance
made him, if anything, better-looking than ever. It brought out a
certain strength of mouth and jaw which I had not observed there
hitherto. It gave him an ugliness of expression which only emphasized
his perfection of feature.

“You mustn't do that either,” said he, shortly. “I have an appointment
at the station. I shall be talking business all the time.”

He was gone to his room, and I went to mine feeling duly snubbed; yet I
deserved it; for I had exhibited a characteristic (though not chronic)
want of taste, of which I am sometimes guilty to this day. Not to show
ill-feeling on the head of it, I nevertheless followed him down again
in four or five minutes. And I was rewarded by his brightest smile as he
grasped my hand.

“Come to-morrow by the same train,” said he, naming station, line, and
hour; “unless I telegraph, all will be ready and you shall be met. You
may rely on reasonable charges. As to the fishing, go up-stream--to the
right when you strike the beck--and you'll find a good pool or two. I
may have to go to Lancaster the day after to-morrow, but I shall give
you a call when I get back.”

With that we parted, as good friends as ever. I observed that my regret
at losing him was shared by the boots, who stood beside me on the steps
as his hansom rattled off.

“I suppose Mr. Rattray stays here always when he comes to town?” said I.

“No, sir,” said the man, “we've never had him before, not in my time;
but I shouldn't mind if he came again.” And he looked twice at the coin
in his hand before pocketing it with evident satisfaction.

Lonely as I was, and wished to be, I think that I never felt my
loneliness as I did during the twenty-four hours which intervened
between Rattray's departure and my own. They dragged like wet days by
the sea, and the effect was as depressing. I have seldom been at such
a loss for something to do; and in my idleness I behaved like a child,
wishing my new friend back again, or myself on the railway with my new
friend, until I blushed for the beanstalk growth of my regard for him,
an utter stranger, and a younger man. I am less ashamed of it now: he
had come into my dark life like a lamp, and his going left a darkness
deeper than before.

In my dejection I took a new view of the night's outrage. It was no
common burglar's work, for what had I worth stealing? It was the work of
my unseen enemies, who dogged me in the street; they alone knew why; the
doctor had called these hallucinations, and I had forced myself to agree
with the doctor; but I could not deceive myself in my present mood.
I remembered the steps, the steps--the stopping when I stopped--the
drawing away in the crowded streets---the closing up in quieter places.
Why had I never looked round? Why? Because till to-day I had thought it
mere vulgar curiosity; because a few had bored me, I had imagined the
many at my heels; but now I knew--I knew! It was the few again: a few
who hated me even unto death.

The idea took such a hold upon me that I did not trouble my head with
reasons and motives. Certain persons had designs upon my life; that was
enough for me. On the whole, the thought was stimulating; it set a new
value on existence, and it roused a certain amount of spirit even in me.
I would give the fellows another chance before I left town. They should
follow me once more, and this time to some purpose. Last night they had
left a knife on me; to-night I would have a keepsake ready for them.

Hitherto I had gone unarmed since my landing, which, perhaps, was no
more than my duty as a civilized citizen. On Black Hill Flats, however,
I had formed another habit, of which I should never have broken myself
so easily, but for the fact that all the firearms I ever had were
reddening and rotting at the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean. I now went
out and bought me such a one as I had never possessed before.

The revolver was then in its infancy; but it did exist; and by dusk
I was owner of as fine a specimen as could be procured in the city of
London. It had but five chambers, but the barrel was ten inches long;
one had to cap it, and to put in the powder and the wadded bullet
separately; but the last-named would have killed an elephant. The oak
case that I bought with it cumbers my desk as I write, and, shut,
you would think that it had never contained anything more lethal than
fruit-knives. I open it, and there are the green-baize compartments, one
with a box of percussion caps, still apparently full, another that could
not contain many more wadded-bullets, and a third with a powder-horn
which can never have been much lighter. Within the lid is a label
bearing the makers' names; the gentlemen themselves are unknown to me,
even if they are still alive; nevertheless, after five-and-forty years,
let me dip my pen to Messrs. Deane, Adams and Deane!

That night I left this case in my room, locked, and the key in my
waistcoat pocket; in the right-hand side-pocket of my overcoat I carried
my Deane and Adams, loaded in every chamber; also my right hand, as
innocently as you could wish. And just that night I was not followed! I
walked across Regent's Park, and I dawdled on Primrose Hill, without
the least result. Down I turned into the Avenue Road, and presently was
strolling between green fields towards Finchley. The moon was up, but
nicely shaded by a thin coating of clouds which extended across the sky:
it was an ideal night for it. It was also my last night in town, and I
did want to give the beggars their last chance. But they did not even
attempt to avail themselves of it: never once did they follow me: my
ears were in too good training to make any mistake. And the reason only
dawned on me as I drove back disappointed: they had followed me already
to the gunsmith's!

Convinced of this, I entertained but little hope of another midnight
visitor. Nevertheless, I put my light out early, and sat a long time
peeping through my blind; but only an inevitable Tom, with back hunched
up and tail erect, broke the moonlit profile of the back-garden wall;
and once more that disreputable music (which none the less had saved my
life) was the only near sound all night.

I felt very reluctant to pack Deane and Adams away in his case next
morning, and the case in my portmanteau, where I could not get at it in
case my unknown friends took it into their heads to accompany me out of
town. In the hope that they would, I kept him loaded, and in the same
overcoat pocket, until late in the afternoon, when, being very near my
northern destination, and having the compartment to myself, I locked the
toy away with considerable remorse for the price I had paid for it. All
down the line I had kept an eye for suspicious characters with an eye
upon me; but even my self-consciousness failed to discover one; and I
reached my haven of peace, and of fresh fell air, feeling, I suppose,
much like any other fool who has spent his money upon a white elephant.




CHAPTER IX. MY CONVALESCENT HOME


The man Braithwaite met me at the station with a spring cart. The very
porters seemed to expect me, and my luggage was in the cart before I
had given up my ticket. Nor had we started when I first noticed that
Braithwaite did not speak when I spoke to him. On the way, however, a
more flagrant instance recalled young Rattray's remark, that the man was
“not like other people.” I had imagined it to refer to a mental, not
a physical, defect; whereas it was clear to me now that my prospective
landlord was stone-deaf, and I presently discovered him to be dumb as
well. Thereafter I studied him with some attention during our drive of
four or five miles. I called to mind the theory that an innate physical
deficiency is seldom without its moral counterpart, and I wondered how
far this would apply to the deaf-mute at my side, who was ill-grown,
wizened, and puny into the bargain. The brow-beaten face of him was
certainly forbidding, and he thrashed his horse up the hills in a
dogged, vindictive, thorough-going way which at length made me jump
out and climb one of them on foot. It was the only form of protest that
occurred to me.

The evening was damp and thick. It melted into night as we drove.
I could form no impression of the country, but this seemed desolate
enough. I believe we met no living soul on the high road which we
followed for the first three miles or more. At length we turned into a
narrow lane, with a stiff stone wall on either hand, and this eventually
led us past the lights of what appeared to be a large farm; it was
really a small hamlet; and now we were nearing our destination. Gates
had to be opened, and my poor driver breathed hard from the continual
getting down and up. In the end a long and heavy cart-track brought us
to the loneliest light that I have ever seen. It shone on the side of a
hill--in the heart of an open wilderness--as solitary as a beacon-light
at sea. It was the light of the cottage which was to be my temporary
home.

A very tall, gaunt woman stood in the doorway against the inner glow.
She advanced with a loose, long stride, and invited me to enter in a
voice harsh (I took it) from disuse. I was warming myself before the
kitchen fire when she came in carrying my heaviest box as though it had
nothing in it. I ran to take it from her, for the box was full of books,
but she shook her head, and was on the stairs with it before I could
intercept her.

I conceive that very few men are attracted by abnormal strength in a
woman; we cannot help it; and yet it was not her strength which first
repelled me in Mrs. Braithwaite. It was a combination of attributes. She
had a poll of very dirty and untidy red hair; her eyes were set close
together; she had the jowl of the traditional prize-fighter. But far
more disagreeable than any single feature was the woman's expression,
or rather the expression which I caught her assuming naturally, and
banishing with an effort for my benefit. To me she was strenuously
civil in her uncouth way. But I saw her give her husband one look, as
he staggered in with my comparatively light portmanteau, which she
instantly snatched out of his feeble arms. I saw this look again before
the evening was out, and it was such a one as Braithwaite himself had
fixed upon his horse as he flogged it up the hills.

I began to wonder how the young squire had found it in his conscience to
recommend such a pair. I wondered less when the woman finally ushered
me upstairs to my rooms. These were small and rugged, but eminently snug
and clean. In each a good fire blazed cheerfully; my portmanteau was
already unstrapped, the table in the sitting-room already laid; and I
could not help looking twice at the silver and the glass, so bright was
their condition, so good their quality. Mrs. Braithwaite watched me from
the door.

“I doubt you'll be thinking them's our own,” said she. “I wish they
were; t'squire sent 'em in this afternoon.”

“For my use?”

“Ay; I doubt he thought what we had ourselves wasn't good enough. An'
it's him 'at sent t' armchair, t'bed-linen, t'bath, an' that there
lookin'-glass an' all.”

She had followed me into the bedroom, where I looked with redoubled
interest at each object as she mentioned it, and it was in the glass--a
masqueline shaving-glass--that I caught my second glimpse of my
landlady's evil expression--levelled this time at myself.

I instantly turned round and told her that I thought it very kind of Mr.
Rattray, but that, for my part, I was not a luxurious man, and that I
felt rather sorry the matter had not been left entirely in her hands.
She retired seemingly mollified, and she took my sympathy with her,
though I was none the less pleased and cheered by my new friend's zeal
for my comfort; there were even flowers on my table, without a doubt
from Kirby Hall.

And in another matter the squire had not misled me: the woman was an
excellent plain cook. I expected ham and eggs. Sure enough, this was my
dish, but done to a turn. The eggs were new and all unbroken, the ham
so lean and yet so tender, that I would not have exchanged my humble,
hearty meal for the best dinner served that night in London. It made a
new man of me, after my long journey and my cold, damp drive. I was for
chatting with Mrs. Braithwaite when she came up to clear away. I
thought she might be glad to talk after the life she must lead with her
afflicted husband, but it seemed to have had the opposite effect on her.
All I elicited was an ambiguous statement as to the distance between the
cottage and the hall; it was “not so far.” And so she left me to my pipe
and to my best night yet, in the stillest spot I have ever slept in
on dry land; one heard nothing but the bubble of a beck; and it seemed
very, very far away.

A fine, bright morning showed me my new surroundings in their true
colors; even in the sunshine these were not very gay. But gayety was the
last thing I wanted. Peace and quiet were my whole desire, and both were
here, set in scenery at once lovely to the eye and bracing to the soul.

From the cottage doorstep one looked upon a perfect panorama of
healthy, open English country. Purple hills hemmed in a broad, green,
undulating plateau, scored across and across by the stone walls of the
north, and all dappled with the shadows of rolling leaden clouds with
silver fringes. Miles away a church spire stuck like a spike out of the
hollow, and the smoke of a village dimmed the trees behind. No nearer
habitation could I see. I have mentioned a hamlet which we passed in the
spring-cart. It lay hidden behind some hillocks to the left. My landlady
told me it was better than half a mile away, and “nothing when you get
there; no shop; no post-office; not even a public--house.”

I inquired in which direction lay the hall. She pointed to the nearest
trees, a small forest of stunted oaks, which shut in the view to the
right, after quarter of a mile of a bare and rugged valley. Through this
valley twisted the beck which I had heard faintly in the night. It ran
through the oak plantation and so to the sea, some two or three miles
further on, said my landlady; but nobody would have thought it was so
near.

“T'squire was to be away to-day,” observed the woman, with the broad
vowel sound which I shall not attempt to reproduce in print. “He was
going to Lancaster, I believe.”

“So I understood,” said I. “I didn't think of troubling him, if that's
what you mean. I'm going to take his advice and fish the beck.”

And I proceeded to do so after a hearty early dinner: the keen, chill
air was doing me good already: the “perfect quiet” was finding its
way into my soul. I blessed my specialist, I blessed Squire Rattray, I
blessed the very villains who had brought us within each other's ken;
and nowhere was my thanksgiving more fervent than in the deep cleft
threaded by the beck; for here the shrewd yet gentle wind passed
completely overhead, and the silence was purged of oppression by the
ceaseless symphony of clear water running over clean stones.

But it was no day for fishing, and no place for the fly, though I went
through the form of throwing one for several hours. Here the stream
merely rinsed its bed, there it stood so still, in pools of liquid
amber, that, when the sun shone, the very pebbles showed their shadows
in the deepest places. Of course I caught nothing; but, towards the
close of the gold-brown afternoon, I made yet another new acquaintance,
in the person of a little old clergyman who attacked me pleasantly from
the rear.

“Bad day for fishing, sir,” croaked the cheery voice which first
informed me of his presence. “Ah, I knew it must be a stranger,” he
cried as I turned and he hopped down to my side with the activity of a
much younger man.

“Yes,” I said, “I only came down from London yesterday. I find the spot
so delightful that I haven't bothered much about the sport. Still, I've
had about enough of it now.” And I prepared to take my rod to pieces.

“Spot and sport!” laughed the old gentleman. “Didn't mean it for a
pun, I hope? Never could endure puns! So you came down yesterday, young
gentleman, did you? And where may you be staying?”

I described the position of my cottage without the slightest hesitation;
for this parson did not scare me; except in appearance he had so
little in common with his type as I knew it. He had, however, about the
shrewdest pair of eyes that I have ever seen, and my answer only served
to intensify their open scrutiny.

“How on earth did you come to hear of a God-forsaken place like this?”
 said he, making use, I thought, of a somewhat stronger expression than
quite became his cloth.

“Squire Rattray told me of it,” said I.

“Ha! So you're a friend of his, are you?” And his eyes went through and
through me like knitting-needles through a ball of wool.

“I could hardly call myself that,” said I. “But Mr. Rattray has been
very kind to me.”

“Meet him in town?”

I said I had, but I said it with some coolness, for his tone had dropped
into the confidential, and I disliked it as much as this string of
questions from a stranger.

“Long ago, sir?” he pursued.

“No, sir; not long ago,” I retorted.

“May I ask your name?” said he.

“You may ask what you like,” I cried, with a final reversal of all my
first impressions of this impertinent old fellow; “but I'm hanged if
I tell it you! I am here for rest and quiet, sir. I don't ask you your
name. I can't for the life of me see what right you have to ask me mine,
or to question me at all, for that matter.”

He favored me with a brief glance of extraordinary suspicion. It faded
away in mere surprise, and, next instant, my elderly and reverend friend
was causing me some compunction by coloring like a boy.

“You may think my curiosity mere impertinence, sir,” said he; “you would
think otherwise if you knew as much as I do of Squire Rattray's friends,
and how little you resemble the generality of them. You might even feel
some sympathy for one of the neighboring clergy, to whom this godless
young man has been for years as a thorn in their side.”

He spoke so gravely, and what he said was so easy to believe, that I
could not but apologize for my hasty words.

“Don't name it, sir,” said the clergyman; “you had a perfect right to
resent my questions, and I enjoy meeting young men of spirit; but not
when it's an evil spirit, such as, I fear, possesses your friend! I do
assure you, sir, that the best thing I have heard of him for years is
the very little that you have told me. As a rule, to hear of him at all
in this part of the world, is to wish that we had not heard. I see him
coming, however, and shall detain you no longer, for I don't deny that
there is no love lost between us.”

I looked round, and there was Rattray on the top of the bank, a long
way to the left, coming towards me with a waving hat. An extraordinary
ejaculation brought me to the right-about next instant.

The old clergyman had slipped on a stone in mid-stream, and, as he
dragged a dripping leg up the opposite bank, he had sworn an oath worthy
of the “godless young man” who had put him to flight, and on whose
demerits he had descanted with so much eloquence and indignation.




CHAPTER X. WINE AND WEAKNESS


“Sporting old parson who knows how to swear?” laughed Rattray. “Never saw
him in my life before; wondered who the deuce he was.”

“Really?” said I. “He professed to know something of you.”

“Against me, you mean? My dear Cole, don't trouble to perjure yourself.
I don't mind, believe me. They're easily shocked, these country clergy,
and no doubt I'm a bugbear to 'em. Yet, I could have sworn I'd never
seen this one before. Let's have another look.”

We were walking away together. We turned on the top of the bank. And
there the old clergyman was planted on the moorside, and watching us
intently from under his hollowed hands.

“Well, I'm hanged!” exclaimed Rattray, as the hands fell and their
owner beat a hasty retreat. My companion said no more; indeed, for some
minutes we pursued our way in silence. And I thought that it was with an
effort that he broke into sudden inquiries concerning my journey and my
comfort at the cottage.

This gave me an opportunity of thanking him for his little attentions.
“It was awfully good of you,” said I, taking his arm as though I had
known him all my life; nor do I think there was another living man with
whom I would have linked arms at that time.

“Good?” cried he. “Nonsense, my dear sir! I'm only afraid you find
it devilish rough. But, at all events, you're coming to dine with me
to-night.”

“Am I?” I asked, smiling.

“Rather!” said he. “My time here is short enough. I don't lose sight of
you again between this and midnight.”

“It's most awfully good of you,” said I again.

“Wait till you see! You'll find it rough enough at my place; all my
retainers are out for the day at a local show.”

“Then I certainly shall not give you the trouble.”

He interrupted me with his jovial laugh.

“My good fellow,” he cried, “that's the fun of it! How do you suppose
I've been spending the day? Told you I was going to Lancaster, did I?
Well, I've been cooking our dinner instead--laying the table--getting
up the wines--never had such a joke! Give you my word, I almost forgot I
was in the wilderness!”

“So you're quite alone, are you?”

“Yes; as much so as that other beggar who was monarch of all he
surveyed, his right there was none to dispute, from the what-is-it down
to the glade--”

“I'll come,” said I, as we reached the cottage. “Only first you must let
me make myself decent.”

“You're decent enough!”

“My boots are wet; my hands--”

“All serene! I'll give you five minutes.”

And I left him outside, flourishing a handsome watch, while, on my way
upstairs, I paused to tell Mrs. Braithwaite that I was dining at the
hall. She was busy cooking, and I felt prepared for her unpleasant
expression; but she showed no annoyance at my news. I formed the
impression that it was no news to her. And next minute I heard a
whispering below; it was unmistakable in that silent cottage, where not
a word had reached me yet, save in conversation to which I was myself a
party.

I looked out of window. Rattray I could no longer see. And I confess
that I felt both puzzled and annoyed until we walked away together, when
it was his arm which was immediately thrust through mine.

“A good soul, Jane,” said he; “though she made an idiotic marriage, and
leads a life which might spoil the temper of an archangel. She was my
nurse when I was a youngster, Cole, and we never meet without a yarn.”
 Which seemed natural enough; still I failed to perceive why they need
yarn in whispers.

Kirby Hall proved startlingly near at hand. We descended the bare
valley to the right, we crossed the beck upon a plank, were in the
oak-plantation about a minute, and there was the hall upon the farther
side.

And a queer old place it seemed, half farm, half feudal castle: fowls
strutting at large about the back premises (which we were compelled to
skirt), and then a front door of ponderous oak, deep-set between walls
fully six feet thick, and studded all over with wooden pegs. The facade,
indeed, was wholly grim, with a castellated tower at one end, and a
number of narrow, sunken windows looking askance on the wreck and
ruin of a once prim, old-fashioned, high-walled garden. I thought that
Rattray might have shown more respect for the house of his ancestors.
It put me in mind of a neglected grave. And yet I could forgive a bright
young fellow for never coming near so desolate a domain.

We dined delightfully in a large and lofty hall, formerly used (said
Rattray) as a court-room. The old judgment seat stood back against the
wall, and our table was the one at which the justices had been wont to
sit. Then the chamber had been low-ceiled; now it ran to the roof, and
we ate our dinner beneath a square of fading autumn sky, with I wondered
how many ghosts looking down on us from the oaken gallery! I was
interested, impressed, awed not a little, and yet all in a way which
afforded my mind the most welcome distraction from itself and from the
past. To Rattray, on the other hand, it was rather sadly plain that the
place was both a burden and a bore; in fact he vowed it was the dampest
and the dullest old ruin under the sun, and that he would sell it
to-morrow if he could find a lunatic to buy. His want of sentiment
struck me as his one deplorable trait. Yet even this displayed his
characteristic merit of frankness. Nor was it at all unpleasant to hear
his merry, boyish laughter ringing round hall and gallery, ere it died
away against a dozen closed doors.

And there were other elements of good cheer: a log fire blazing heartily
in the old dog-grate, casting a glow over the stone flags, a reassuring
flicker into the darkest corner: cold viands of the very best: and the
finest old Madeira that has ever passed my lips.

Now, all my life I have been a “moderate drinker” in the most literal
sense of that slightly elastic term. But at the sad time of which I
am trying to write, I was almost an abstainer, from the fear, the
temptation--of seeking oblivion in strong waters. To give way then was
to go on giving way. I realized the danger, and I took stern measures.
Not stern enough, however; for what I did not realize was my weak and
nervous state, in which a glass would have the same effect on me as
three or four upon a healthy man.

Heaven knows how much or how little I took that evening! I can swear
it was the smaller half of either bottle--and the second we never
finished--but the amount matters nothing. Even me it did not make
grossly tipsy. But it warmed my blood, it cheered my heart, it excited
my brain, and--it loosened my tongue. It set me talking with a freedom
of which I should have been incapable in my normal moments, on a subject
whereof I had never before spoken of my own free will. And yet the will
to--speak--to my present companion--was no novelty. I had felt it at our
first meeting in the private hotel. His tact, his sympathy, his handsome
face, his personal charm, his frank friendliness, had one and all
tempted me to bore this complete stranger with unsolicited confidences
for which an inquisitive relative might have angled in vain. And the
temptation was the stronger because I knew in my heart that I should
not bore the young squire at all; that he was anxious enough to hear my
story from my own lips, but too good a gentleman intentionally to
betray such anxiety. Vanity was also in the impulse. A vulgar newspaper
prominence had been my final (and very genuine) tribulation; but to
please and to interest one so pleasing and so interesting to me, was
another and a subtler thing. And then there was his sympathy--shall I
add his admiration?--for my reward.

I do not pretend that I argued thus deliberately in my heated and
excited brain. I merely hold that all these small reasons and motives
were there, fused and exaggerated by the liquor which was there as well.
Nor can I say positively that Rattray put no leading questions; only
that I remember none which had that sound; and that, once started, I am
afraid I needed only too little encouragement to run on and on.

Well, I was set going before we got up from the table. I continued in
an armchair that my host dragged from a little book-lined room adjoining
the hall. I finished on my legs, my back to the fire, my hands beating
wildly together. I had told my dear Rattray of my own accord more than
living man had extracted from me yet. He interrupted me very little;
never once until I came to the murderous attack by Santos on the drunken
steward.

“The brute!” cried Rattray. “The cowardly, cruel, foreign devil! And you
never let out one word of that!”

“What was the good?” said I. “They are all gone now--all gone to their
account. Every man of us was a brute at the last. There was nothing to
be gained by telling the public that.”

He let me go on until I came to another point which I had hitherto kept
to myself: the condition of the dead mate's fingers: the cries that the
sight of them had recalled.

“That Portuguese villain again!” cried my companion, fairly leaping from
the chair which I had left and he had taken. “It was the work of the
same cane that killed the steward. Don't tell me an Englishman would
have done it; and yet you said nothing about that either!”

It was my first glimpse of this side of my young host's character. Nor
did I admire him the less, in his spirited indignation, because much of
this was clearly against myself. His eyes flashed. His face was white. I
suddenly found myself the cooler man of the two.

“My dear fellow, do consider!” said I. “What possible end could have
been served by my stating what I couldn't prove against a man who
could never be brought to book in this world? Santos was punished as he
deserved; his punishment was death, and there's an end on't.”

“You might be right,” said Rattray, “but it makes my blood boil to hear
such a story. Forgive me if I have spoken strongly;” and he paced his
hall for a little in an agitation which made me like him better and
better. “The cold-blooded villain!” he kept muttering; “the infernal,
foreign, blood-thirsty rascal! Perhaps you were right; it couldn't have
done any good, I know; but--I only wish he'd lived for us to hang him,
Cole! Why, a beast like that is capable of anything: I wonder if
you've told me the worst even now?” And he stood before me, with candid
suspicion in his fine, frank eyes.

“What makes you say that?” said I, rather nettled.

“I shan't tell you if it's going to rile you, old fellow,” was his reply.
And with it reappeared the charming youth whom I found it impossible
to resist. “Heaven knows you have had enough to worry you!” he added, in
his kindly, sympathetic voice.

“So much,” said I, “that you cannot add to it, my dear Rattray. Now,
then! Why do you think there was something worse?”

“You hinted as much in town: rightly or wrongly I gathered there was
something you would never speak about to living man.”

I turned from him with a groan.

“Ah! but that had nothing to do with Santos.”

“Are you sure?” he cried.

“No,” I murmured; “it had something to do with him, in a sense; but
don't ask me any more.” And I leaned my forehead on the high oak
mantel-piece, and groaned again.

His hand was upon my shoulder.

“Do tell me,” he urged. I was silent. He pressed me further. In my
fancy, both hand and voice shook with his sympathy.

“He had a step-daughter,” said I at last.

“Yes? Yes?”

“I loved her. That was all.”

His hand dropped from my shoulder. I remained standing, stooping,
thinking only of her whom I had lost for ever. The silence was intense.
I could hear the wind sighing in the oaks without, the logs burning
softly away at my feet And so we stood until the voice of Rattray
recalled me from the deck of the Lady Jermyn and my lost love's side.

“So that was all!”

I turned and met a face I could not read.

“Was it not enough?” cried I. “What more would you have?”

“I expected some more-foul play!”

“Ah!” I exclaimed bitterly. “So that was all that interested you! No,
there was no more foul play that I know of; and if there was, I don't
care. Nothing matters to me but one thing. Now that you know what that
is, I hope you're satisfied.”

It was no way to speak to one's host. Yet I felt that he had pressed me
unduly. I hated myself for my final confidence, and his want of sympathy
made me hate him too. In my weakness, however, I was the natural prey
of violent extremes. His hand flew out to me. He was about to speak.
A moment more and I had doubtless forgiven him. But another sound
came instead and made the pair of us start and stare. It was the soft
shutting of some upstairs door.

“I thought we had the house to ourselves?” cried I, my miserable nerves
on edge in an instant.

“So did I,” he answered, very pale. “My servants must have come back. By
the Lord Harry, they shall hear of this!”

He sprang to a door, I heard his feet clattering up some stone stairs,
and in a trice he was running along the gallery overhead; in another
I heard him railing behind some upper door that he had flung open and
banged behind him; then his voice dropped, and finally died away. I was
left some minutes in the oppressively silent hall, shaken, startled,
ashamed of my garrulity, aching to get away. When he returned it was by
another of the many closed doors, and he found me awaiting him, hat in
hand. He was wearing his happiest look until he saw my hat.

“Not going?” he cried. “My dear Cole, I can't apologize sufficiently for
my abrupt desertion of you, much less for the cause. It was my man,
just come in from the show, and gone up the back way. I accused him of
listening to our conversation. Of course he denies it; but it really
doesn't matter, as I'm sorry to say he's much too 'fresh' (as they call
it down here) to remember anything to-morrow morning. I let him have it,
I can tell you. Varlet! Caitiff! But if you bolt off on the head of it,
I shall go back and sack him into the bargain!”

I assured him I had my own reasons for wishing to retire early. He could
have no conception of my weakness, my low and nervous condition of
body and mind; much as I had enjoyed myself, he must really let me go.
Another glass of wine, then? Just one more? No, I had drunk too much
already. I was in no state to stand it. And I held out my hand with
decision.

Instead of taking it he looked at me very hard.

“The place doesn't suit you,” said he. “I see it doesn't, and I'm
devilish sorry! Take my advice and try something milder; now do,
to-morrow; for I should never forgive myself if it made you worse
instead of better; and the air is too strong for lots of people.”

I was neither too ill nor too vexed to laugh outright in his face.

“It's not the air,” said I; “it's that splendid old Madeira of yours,
that was too strong for me, if you like! No, no, Rattray, you don't get
rid of me so cheaply-much as you seem to want to!”

“I was only thinking of you,” he rejoined, with a touch of pique that
convinced me of his sincerity. “Of course I want you to stop, though
I shan't be here many days; but I feel responsible for you, Cole,
and that's the fact. Think you can find your way?” he continued,
accompanying me to the gate, a postern in the high garden wall. “Hadn't
you better have a lantern?”

No; it was unnecessary. I could see splendidly, had the bump of locality
and as many more lies as would come to my tongue. I was indeed burning
to be gone.

A moment later I feared that I had shown this too plainly. For his final
handshake was hearty enough to send me away something ashamed of
my precipitancy, and with a further sense of having shown him
small gratitude for his kindly anxiety on my behalf. I would behave
differently to-morrow. Meanwhile I had new regrets.

At first it was comparatively easy to see, for the lights of the house
shone faintly among the nearer oaks. But the moon was hidden behind
heavy clouds, and I soon found myself at a loss in a terribly dark zone
of timber. Already I had left the path. I felt in my pocket for matches.
I had none.

My head was now clear enough, only deservedly heavy. I was still
quarrelling with myself for my indiscretions and my incivilities, one
and all the result of his wine and my weakness, and this new predicament
(another and yet more vulgar result) was the final mortification. I
swore aloud. I simply could not see a foot in front of my face. Once I
proved it by running my head hard against a branch. I was hopelessly and
ridiculously lost within a hundred yards of the hall!

Some minutes I floundered, ashamed to go back, unable to proceed for
the trees and the darkness. I heard the beck running over its stones. I
could still see an occasional glimmer from the windows I had left. But
the light was now on this side, now on that; the running water chuckled
in one ear after the other; there was nothing for it but to return in
all humility for the lantern which I had been so foolish as to refuse.

And as I resigned myself to this imperative though inglorious course, my
heart warmed once more to the jovial young squire. He would laugh, but
not unkindly, at my grotesque dilemma; at the thought of his laughter I
began to smile myself. If he gave me another chance I would smoke that
cigar with him before starting home afresh, and remove, from my own
mind no less than from his, all ill impressions. After all it was not
his fault that I had taken too much of his wine; but a far worse offence
was to be sulky in one's cups. I would show him that I was myself again
in all respects. I have admitted that I was temporarily, at all events,
a creature of extreme moods. It was in this one that I retraced my steps
towards the lights, and at length let myself into the garden by the
postern at which I had shaken Rattray's hand not ten minutes before.

Taking heart of grace, I stepped up jauntily to the porch. The weeds
muffled my steps. I myself had never thought of doing so, when all at
once I halted in a vague terror. Through the deep lattice windows I
had seen into the lighted hall. And Rattray was once more seated at his
table, a little company of men around him.

I crept nearer, and my heart stopped. Was I delirious, or raving mad
with wine? Or had the sea given up its dead?




CHAPTER XI. I LIVE AGAIN


Squire Rattray, as I say, was seated at the head of his table, where
the broken meats still lay as he and I had left them; his fingers, I
remember, were playing with a crust, and his eyes fixed upon a distant
door, as he leant back in his chair. Behind him hovered the nigger of
the Lady Jermyn, whom I had been the slower to recognize, had not her
skipper sat facing me on the squire's right. Yes, there was Captain
Harris in the flesh, eating heartily between great gulps of wine,
instead of feeding the fishes as all the world supposed. And nearer
still, nearer me than any, with his back to my window but his chair
slued round a little, so that he also could see that door, and I his
profile, sat Joaquin Santos with his cigarette!

None spoke; all seemed waiting; and all were silent but the captain,
whose vulgar champing reached me through the crazy lattice, as I stood
spellbound and petrified without.

They say that a drowning man lives his life again before the last; but
my own fight with the sea provided me with no such moments of vivid and
rapid retrospect as those during which I stood breathless outside the
lighted windows of Kirby Hall. I landed again. I was dogged day and
night. I set it down to nerves and notoriety; but took refuge in a
private hotel. One followed me, engaged the next room, set a watch on
all my movements; another came in by the window to murder me in my
bed; no party to that, the first one nevertheless turned the outrage to
account, wormed himself into my friendship on the strength of it, and
lured me hither, an easy prey. And here was the gang of them, to meet
me! No wonder Rattray had not let me see him off at the station; no
wonder I had not been followed that night. Every link I saw in its
right light instantly. Only the motive remained obscure. Suspicious
circumstances swarmed upon my slow perception: how innocent I had been!
Less innocent, however, than wilfully and wholly reckless: what had it
mattered with whom I made friends? What had anything mattered to me?
What did anything matter--

I thought my heart had snapped!

Why were they watching that door, Joaquin Santos and the young squire?
Whom did they await? I knew! Oh, I knew! My heart leaped, my blood
danced, my eyes lay in wait with theirs. Everything began to matter
once more. It was as though the machinery of my soul, long stopped, had
suddenly been set in motion; it was as though I was born again.

How long we seemed to wait I need not say. It cannot have been many
moments in reality, for Santos was blowing his rings of smoke in the
direction of the door, and the first that I noticed were but dissolving
when it opened--and the best was true! One instant I saw her very
clearly, in the light of a candle which she carried in its silver stick;
then a mist blinded me, and I fell on my knees in the rank bed into
which I had stepped, to give such thanks to the Almighty as this heart
has never felt before or since. And I remained kneeling; for now my face
was on a level with the sill; and when my eyes could see again, there
stood my darling before them in the room.

Like a queen she stood, in the very travelling cloak in which I had seen
her last; it was tattered now, but she held it close about her as though
a shrewd wind bit her to the core. Her sweet face was all peeked and
pale in the candle-light: she who had been a child was come to womanhood
in a few weeks. But a new spirit flashed in her dear eyes, a new
strength hardened her young lips. She stood as an angel brought to book
by devils; and so noble was her calm defiance, so serene her scorn,
that, as I watched and listened; all present fear for her passed out of
my heart.

The first sound was the hasty rising of young Rattray; he was at Eva's
side next instant, essaying to lead her to his chair, with a flush which
deepened as she repulsed him coldly.

“You have sent for me, and I have come,” said she. “But I prefer not to
sit down in your presence; and what you have to say, you will be good
enough to say as quickly as possible, that I may go again before I
am--stifled!”

It was her one hot word; aimed at them all, it seemed to me to fall like
a lash on Rattray's cheek, bringing the blood to it like lightning. But
it was Santos who snatched the cigarette from his mouth, and opened upon
the defenceless girl in a torrent of Portuguese, yellow with rage, and a
very windmill of lean arms and brown hands in the terrifying rapidity of
his gesticulations. They did not terrify Eva Denison. When Rattray took
a step towards the speaker, with flashing eyes, it was some word from
Eva that checked him; when Santos was done, it was to Rattray that she
turned with her answer.

“He calls me a liar for telling you that Mr. Cole knew all,” said she,
thrilling me with my own name. “Don't you say anything,” she added, as
the young man turned on Santos with a scowl; “you are one as wicked as
the other, but there was a time when I thought differently of you: his
character I have always known. Of the two evils, I prefer to speak to
you.”

Rattray bowed, humbly enough, I thought; but my darling's nostrils only
curled the more.

“He calls me a liar,” she continued; “so may you all. Since you have
found it out, I admit it freely and without shame; one must be false in
the hands of false fiends like all of you. Weakness is nothing to you;
helplessness is nothing; you must be met with your own weapons, and so I
lied in my sore extremity to gain the one miserable advantage within my
reach. He says you found me out by making friends with Mr. Cole. He
says that Mr. Cole has been dining with you in this very room, this
very night. You still tell the truth sometimes; has that man--that
demon--told it for once?”

“It is perfectly true,” said Rattray in a low voice.

“And poor Mr. Cole told you that he knew nothing of your villany?”

“I found out that he knew absolutely nothing--after first thinking
otherwise.”

“Suppose he had known? What would you have done?”

Rattray said nothing. Santos shrugged as he lit a fresh cigarette. The
captain went on with his supper.

“Ashamed to say!” cried Eva Denison. “So you have some shame left still!
Well, I will tell you. You would have murdered him, as you murdered all
the rest; you would have killed him in cold blood, as I wish and pray
that you would kill me!”

The young fellow faced her, white to the lips. “You have no right to
say that, Miss Denison!” he cried. “I may be bad, but, as I am ready to
answer for my sins, the crime of murder is not among them.”

Well, it is still some satisfaction to remember that my love never
punished me with such a look as was the young squire's reward for this
protestation. The curl of the pink nostrils, the parting of the proud
lips, the gleam of the sound white teeth, before a word was spoken,
were more than I, for one, could have borne. For I did not see the grief
underlying the scorn, but actually found it in my heart to pity this
poor devil of a Rattray: so humbly fell those fine eyes of his, so like
a dog did he stand, waiting to be whipped.

“Yes; you are very innocent!” she began at last, so softly that I could
scarcely hear. “You have not committed murder, so you say; let it stand
to your credit by all means. You have no blood upon your hands; you say
so; that is enough. No! you are comparatively innocent, I admit. All
you have done is to make murder easy for others; to get others to do the
dirty work, and then shelter them and share the gain; all you need have
on your conscience is every life that was lost with the Lady Jermyn, and
every soul that lost itself in losing them. You call that innocence?
Then give me honest guilt! Give me the man who set fire to the ship, and
who sits there eating his supper; he is more of a man than you. Give me
the wretch who has beaten men to death before my eyes; there's something
great about a monster like that, there's something to loathe. His
assistant is only little--mean--despicable!” Loud and hurried in its
wrath, low and deliberate in its contempt, all this was uttered with a
furious and abnormal eloquence, which would have struck me, loving her,
to the ground. On Rattray it had a different effect. His head lifted as
she heaped abuse upon it, until he met her flashing eye with that of a
man very thankful to take his deserts and something more; and to mine he
was least despicable when that last word left her lips. When he saw that
it was her last, he took her candle (she had put it down on the ancient
settle against the door), and presented it to her with another bow. And
so without a word he led her to the door, opened it, and bowed yet lower
as she swept out, but still without a tinge of mockery in the obeisance.

He was closing the door after her when Joaquin Santos reached it.

“Diablo!” cried he. “Why let her go? We have not done with her.”

“That doesn't matter; she is done with us,” was the stern reply.

“It does matter,” retorted Santos; “what is more, she is my
step-daughter, and back she shall come!”

“She is also my visitor, and I'm damned if you're going to make her!”

An instant Santos stood, his back to me, his fingers working, his neck
brown with blood; then his coat went into creases across the shoulders,
and he was shrugging still as he turned away.

“Your veesitor!” said he. “Your veesitor! Your veesitor!”

Harris laughed outright as he raised his glass; the hot young squire
had him by the collar, and the wine was spilling on the cloth, as I rose
very cautiously and crept back to the path.

“When rogues fall out!” I was thinking to myself. “I shall save her
yet--I shall save my darling!”

Already I was accustomed to the thought that she still lived, and to the
big heart she had set beating in my feeble frame; already the continued
existence of these villains, with the first dim inkling of their
villainy, was ceasing to be a novelty in a brain now quickened and
prehensile beyond belief. And yet--but a few minutes had I knelt at the
window--but a few more was it since Rattray and I had shaken hands!

Not his visitor; his prisoner, without a doubt; but alive! alive! and,
neither guest nor prisoner for many hours more. O my love! O my heart's
delight! Now I knew why I was spared; to save her; to snatch her from
these rascals; to cherish and protect her evermore!

All the past shone clear behind me; the dark was lightness and the
crooked straight. All the future lay clear ahead it presented no
difficulties yet; a mad, ecstatic confidence was mine for the wildest,
happiest moments of my life.

I stood upright in the darkness. I saw her light!

It was ascending the tower at the building's end; now in this window it
glimmered, now in the one above. At last it was steady, high up near the
stars, and I stole below.

“Eva! Eva!”

There was no answer. Low as it was, my voice was alarming; it cooled
and cautioned me. I sought little stones. I crept back to throw them.
Ah God! her form eclipsed that lighted slit in the gray stone tower. I
heard her weeping high above me at her window.

“Eva! Eva!”

There was a pause, and then a little cry of gladness.

“Is it Mr. Cole?” came in an eager whisper through her tears.

“Yes! yes! I was outside the window. I heard everything.”

“They will hear you!” she cried softly, in a steadier voice.

“No-listen!” They were quarrelling. Rattray's voice was loud and angry.
“They cannot hear,” I continued, in more cautious tones; “they think
I'm in bed and asleep half-a-mile away. Oh, thank God! I'll get you away
from them; trust me, my love, my darling!”

In my madness I knew not what I said; it was my wild heart speaking.
Some moments passed before she replied.

“Will you promise to do nothing I ask you not to do?”

“Of course.”

“My life might answer for it--”

“I promise--I promise.”

“Then wait--hide--watch my light. When you see it back in the window,
watch with all your eyes! I am going to write and then throw it out. Not
another syllable!”

She was gone; there was a long yellow slit in the masonry once more; her
light burnt faint and far within.

I retreated among some bushes and kept watch.

The moon was skimming beneath the surface of a sea of clouds: now the
black billows had silver crests: now an incandescent buoy bobbed among
them. O for enough light, and no more!

In the hall the high voices were more subdued. I heard the captain's
tipsy laugh. My eyes fastened themselves upon that faint and lofty
light, and on my heels I crouched among the bushes.

The flame moved, flickered, and shone small but brilliant on the very
sill. I ran forward on tip-toe. A white flake fluttered to my feet. I
secured it and waited for one word; none came; but the window was softly
shut.

I stood in doubt, the treacherous moonlight all over me now, and once
more the window opened.

“Go quickly!”

And again it was shut; next moment I was stealing close by the spot
where I had knelt. I saw within once more.

Harris nodded in his chair. The nigger had disappeared. Rattray was
lighting a candle, and the Portuguese holding out his hand for the
match.

“Did you lock the gate, senhor?” asked Santos.

“No; but I will now.”

As I opened it I heard a door open within. I could hardly let the latch
down again for the sudden trembling of my fingers. The key turned behind
me ere I had twenty yards' start.

Thank God there was light enough now! I followed the beck. I found
my way. I stood in the open valley, between the oak-plantation and my
desolate cottage, and I kissed my tiny, twisted note again and again in
a paroxysm of passion and of insensate joy. Then I unfolded it and held
it to my eyes in the keen October moonshine.




CHAPTER XII. MY LADY'S BIDDING


Scribbled in sore haste, by a very tremulous little hand, with a pencil,
on the flyleaf of some book, my darling's message is still difficult to
read; it was doubly so in the moonlight, five-and-forty autumns ago. My
eyesight, however, was then perhaps the soundest thing about me, and in
a little I had deciphered enough to guess correctly (as it proved) at
the whole:--


“You say you heard everything just now, and there is no time for further
explanations. I am in the hands of villains, but not ill-treated, though
they are one as bad as the other. You will not find it easy to rescue
me. I don't see how it is to be done. You have promised not to do
anything I ask you not to do, and I implore you not to tell a soul until
you have seen me again and heard more. You might just as well kill me as
come back now with help.

“You see you know nothing, though I told them you knew all. And so you
shall as soon as I can see you for five minutes face to face. In the
meantime do nothing--know nothing when you see Mr. Rattray--unless you
wish to be my death.

“It would have been possible last night, and it may be again to-morrow
night. They all go out every night when they can, except Jose, who is
left in charge. They are out from nine or ten till two or three; if they
are out to-morrow night my candle will be close to the window as I shall
put it when I have finished this. You can see my window from over the
wall. If the light is in front you must climb the wall, for they will
leave the gate locked. I shall see you and will bribe Jose to let me
out for a turn. He has done it before for a bottle of wine. I can manage
him. Can I trust to you? If you break your promise--but you will not?
One of them would as soon kill me as smoke a cigarette, and the rest are
under his thumb. I dare not write more. But my life is in your hands.

“EVA DENISON.”


“Oh! beware of the woman Braithwaite; she is about the worst of the
gang.”

I could have burst out crying in my bitter discomfiture, mortification,
and alarm: to think that her life was in my hands, and that it depended,
not on that prompt action which was the one course I had contemplated,
but on twenty-four hours of resolute inactivity! I would not think it.
I refused the condition. It took away my one prop, my one stay, that
prospect of immediate measures which alone preserved in me such coolness
as I had retained until now. I was cool no longer; where I had relied
on practical direction I was baffled and hindered and driven mad; on my
honor believe I was little less for some moments, groaning, cursing,
and beating the air with impotent fists--in one of them my poor love's
letter crushed already to a ball.

Danger and difficulty I had been prepared to face; but the task that I
was set was a hundred-fold harder than any that had whirled through my
teeming brain. To sit still; to do nothing; to pretend I knew nothing;
an hour of it would destroy my reason--and I was invited to wait
twenty-four!

No; my word was passed; keep it I must. She knew the men, she must know
best; and her life depended on my obedience: she made that so plain.
Obey I must and would; to make a start, I tottered over the plank that
spanned the beck, and soon I saw the cottage against the moonlit sky.
I came up to it. I drew back in sudden fear. It was alight upstairs and
down, and the gaunt strong figure of the woman Braithwaite stood out
as I had seen it first, in the doorway, with the light showing warmly
through her rank red hair.

“Is that you, Mr. Cole?” she cried in a tone that she reserved for me;
yet through the forced amiability there rang a note of genuine surprise.
She had been prepared for me never to return at all!

My knees gave under me as I forced myself to advance; but my wits took
new life from the crisis, and in a flash I saw how to turn my weakness
into account. I made a false step on my way to the door; when I reached
it I leant heavily against the jam, and I said with a slur that I felt
unwell. I had certainly been flushed with wine when I left Rattray; it
would be no bad thing for him to hear that I had arrived quite tipsy at
the cottage; should he discover I had been near an hour on the way, here
was my explanation cut and dried.

So I shammed a degree of intoxication with apparent success, and Jane
Braithwaite gave me her arm up the stairs. My God, how strong it was,
and how weak was mine!

Left to myself, I reeled about my bedroom, pretending to undress; then
out with my candles, and into bed in all my clothes, until the cottage
should be quiet. Yes, I must lie still and feign sleep, with every nerve
and fibre leaping within me, lest the she-devil below should suspect
me of suspicions! It was with her I had to cope for the next
four-and-twenty hours; and she filled me with a greater present terror
than all those villains at the hall; for had not their poor little
helpless captive described her as “about the worst of the gang?”

To think that my love lay helpless there in the hands of those wretches;
and to think that her lover lay helpless here in the supervision of this
vile virago!

It must have been one or two in the morning when I stole to my
sitting-room window, opened it, and sat down to think steadily, with the
counterpane about my shoulders.

The moon sailed high and almost full above the clouds; these were
dispersing as the night wore on, and such as remained were of a
beautiful soft tint between white and gray. The sky was too light for
stars, and beneath it the open country stretched so clear and far that
it was as though one looked out at noonday through slate-colored glass.
Down the dewy slope below my window a few calves fed with toothless
mouthings; the beck was very audible, the oak-trees less so; but for
these peaceful sounds the stillness and the solitude were equally
intense.

I may have sat there like a mouse for half an hour. The reason was that
I had become mercifully engrossed in one of the subsidiary problems:
whether it would be better to drop from the window or to trust to the
creaking stairs. Would the creaking be much worse than the thud, and
the difference worth the risk of a sprained ankle? Well worth it, I at
length decided; the risk was nothing; my window was scarce a dozen feet
from the ground. How easily it could be done, how quickly, how safely in
this deep, stillness and bright moonlight! I would fall so lightly on
my stocking soles; a single soft, dull thud; then away under the moon
without fear or risk of a false step; away over the stone walls to the
main road, and so to the nearest police-station with my tale; and before
sunrise the villains would be taken in their beds, and my darling would
be safe!

I sprang up softly. Why not do it now? Was I bound to keep my rash,
blind promise? Was it possible these murderers would murder her?
I struck a match on my trousers, I lit a candle, I read her letter
carefully again, and again it maddened and distracted me. I struck my
hands together. I paced the room wildly. Caution deserted me, and I made
noise enough to wake the very mute; lost to every consideration but that
of the terrifying day before me, the day of silence and of inactivity,
that I must live through with an unsuspecting face, a cool head, a civil
tongue! The prospect appalled me as nothing else could or did; nay, the
sudden noise upon the stairs, the knock at my door, and the sense that
I had betrayed myself already even now all was over--these came as a
relief after the haunting terror which they interrupted.

I flung the door open, and there stood Mrs. Braithwaite, as fully
dressed as myself.

“You'll not be very well sir?”

“No, I'm not.”

“What's t' matter wi' you?”

This second question was rude and fierce with suspicion: the real woman
rang out in it, yet its effect on me was astonishing: once again was I
inspired to turn my slip into a move.

“Matter?” I cried. “Can't you see what's the matter; couldn't you see
when I came in? Drink's the matter! I came in drunk, and now I'm mad. I
can't stand it; I'm not in a fit state. Do you know nothng of me? Have
they told you nothing? I'm the only man that was saved from the Lady
Jermyn, the ship that was burned to the water's edge with every soul but
me. My nerves are in little ends. I came down here for peace and quiet
and sleep. Do you know that I have hardly slept for two months? And now
I shall never sleep again! O my God I shall die for want of it! The wine
has done it. I never should have touched a drop. I can't stand it; I
can't sleep after it; I shall kill myself if I get no sleep. Do you
hear, you woman? I shall kill myself in your house if I don't get to
sleep!”

I saw her shrink, virago as she was. I waved my arms, I shrieked in
her face. It was not all acting. Heaven knows how true it was about the
sleep. I was slowly dying of insomnia. I was a nervous wreck. She must
have heard it. Now she saw it for herself.

No; it was by no means all acting. Intending only to lie, I found
myself telling little but the strictest truth, and longing for sleep as
passionately as though I had nothing to keep me awake. And yet, while my
heart cried aloud in spite of me, and my nerves relieved themselves in
this unpremeditated ebullition, I was all the time watching its effect
as closely as though no word of it had been sincere.

Mrs. Braithwaite seemed frightened; not at all pitiful; and as I calmed
down she recovered her courage and became insolent. I had spoilt her
night. She had not been told she was to take in a raving lunatic. She
would speak to Squire Rattray in the morning.

“Morning?” I yelled after her as she went. “Send your husband to the
nearest chemist as soon as it's dawn; send him for chloral, chloroform,
morphia, anything they've got and as much of it as they'll let him have.
I'll give you five pounds if you get me what'll send me to sleep all
to-morrow--and to-morrow night!”

Never, I feel sure, were truth and falsehood more craftily interwoven;
yet I had thought of none of it until the woman was at my door, while of
much I had not thought at all. It had rushed from my heart and from my
lips. And no sooner was I alone than I burst into hysterical tears, only
to stop and compliment myself because they sounded genuine--as though
they were not! Towards morning I took to my bed in a burning fever, and
lay there, now congratulating myself upon it, because when night came
they would all think me so secure; and now weeping because the night
might find me dying or dead. So I tossed, with her note clasped in my
hand underneath the sheets; and beneath my very body that stout weapon
that I had bought in town. I might not have to use it, but I was
fatalist enough to fancy that I should. In the meantime it helped me to
lie still, my thoughts fixed on the night, and the day made easy for me
after all.

If only I could sleep!

About nine o'clock Jane Braithwaite paid me a surly visit; in half an
hour she was back with tea and toast and an altered mien. She not only
lit my fire, but treated me the while to her original tone of almost
fervent civility and respect and determination. Her vagaries soon ceased
to puzzle me: the psychology of Jane Braithwaite was not recondite. In
the night it had dawned upon her that Rattray had found me harmless and
was done with me, therefore there was no need for her to put herself out
any further on my account. In the morning, finding me really ill, she
had gone to the hall in alarm; her subsequent attentions were an act of
obedience; and in their midst came Rattray himself to my bedside.




CHAPTER XIII. THE LONGEST DAY OF MY LIFE


The boy looked so blithe and buoyant, so gallant and still so frank,
that even now I could not think as meanly of him as poor Eva did. A
rogue he must be, but surely not the petty rogue that she had made him
out. Yet it was dirty work that he had done by me; and there I had to
lie and take his kind, false, felon's hand in mine.

“My poor dear fellow,” he cried, “I'm most sorry to find you like this.
But I was afraid of it last night. It's all this infernally strong air!”

How I longed to tell him what it was, and to see his face! The thought
of Eva alone restrained me, and I retorted as before, in a tone I strove
to make as friendly, that it was his admirable wine and nothing else.

“But you took hardly any.”

“I shouldn't have touched a drop. I can't stand it. Instead of soothing
me it excites me to the verge of madness. I'm almost over the verge--for
want of sleep--my trouble ever since the trouble.”

Again I was speaking the literal truth, and again congratulating myself
as though it were a lie: the fellow looked so distressed at my state;
indeed I believe that his distress was as genuine as mine, and his
sentiments as involved. He took my hand again, and his brow wrinkled at
its heat. He asked for the other hand to feel my pulse. I had to drop my
letter to comply.

“I wish to goodness there was something I could do for you,” he said.
“Would you--would you care to see a doctor?”

I shook my head, and could have smiled at his visible relief.

“Then I'm going to prescribe for you,” he said with decision. “It's the
place that doesn't agree with you, and it was I who brought you to the
place; therefore it's for me to get you out of it as quick as possible.
Up you get, and I'll drive you to the station myself!”

I had another work to keep from smiling: he was so ingenuously
disingenuous. There was less to smile at in his really nervous anxiety
to get me away. I lay there reading him like a book: it was not my
health that concerned him, of course: was it my safety? I told him he
little knew how ill I was--an inglorious speech that came hard, though
not by any means untrue. “Move me with this fever on me?” said I; “it
would be as much as my miserable life is worth.”

“I'm afraid,” said he, “that it may be as much as your life's worth to
stay on here!” And there was such real fear, in his voice and eyes,
that it reconciled me there and then to the discomfort of a big revolver
between the mattress and the small of my back. “We must get you out
of it,” he continued, “the moment you feel fit to stir. Shall we say
to-morrow?”

“If you like,” I said, advisedly; “and if I can get some sleep to-day.”

“Then to-morrow it is! You see I know it's the climate,” he added,
jumping from tone to tone; “it couldn't have been those two or three
glasses of sound wine.”

“Shall I tell you what it is?” I said, looking him full in the face,
with eyes that I dare say were wild enough with fever and insomnia.
“It's the burning of the Lady Jermyn!” I cried. “It's the faces and the
shrieks of the women; it's the cursing and the fighting of the men; it's
boat-loads struggling in an oily sea; it's husbands and wives jumping
overboard together; it's men turned into devils, it's hell-fire
afloat--”

“Stop! stop!” he whispered, hoarse as a crow. I was sitting up with my
hot eyes upon him. He was white as the quilt, and the bed shook with his
trembling. I had gone as far as was prudent, and I lay back with a glow
of secret satisfaction.

“Yes, I will stop,” said I, “and I wouldn't have begun if you hadn't
found it so difficult to understand my trouble. Now you know what it
is. It's the old trouble. I came up here to forget it; instead of that
I drink too much and tell you all about it; and the two things together
have bowled me over. But I'll go to-morrow; only give me something to
put me asleep till then.”

“I will!” he vowed. “I'll go myself to the nearest chemist, and he shall
give me the very strongest stuff he's got. Good-by, and don't you stir
till I come back--for your own sake. I'll go this minute, and I'll ride
like hell!” And if ever two men were glad to be rid of each other, they
were this young villain and myself.

But what was his villany? It was little enough that I had overheard
at the window, and still less that poor Eva had told me in her hurried
lines. All I saw clearly was that the Lady Jermyn and some hundred souls
had perished by the foulest of foul play; that, besides Eva and myself,
only the incendiaries had escaped; that somehow these wretches had made
a second escape from the gig, leaving dead men and word of their own
death behind them in the boat. And here the motive was as much a mystery
to me as the means; but, in my present state, both were also matters
of supreme indifference. My one desire was to rescue my love from her
loathsome captors; of little else did I pause to think. Yet Rattray's
visit left its own mark on my mind; and long after he was gone I lay
puzzling over the connection between a young Lancastrian, of good
name, of ancient property, of great personal charm, and a crime of
unparalleled atrocity committed in cold blood on the high seas. That
his complicity was flagrant I had no room to doubt, after Eva's own
indictment of him, uttered to his face and in my hearing. Was it then
the usual fraud on the underwriters, and was Rattray the inevitable
accomplice on dry land? I could think of none but the conventional
motive for destroying a vessel. Yet I knew there must be another and a
subtler one, to account not only for the magnitude of the crime, but for
the pains which the actual perpetrators had taken to conceal the fact
of their survival, and for the union of so diverse a trinity as Senhor
Santos, Captain Harris, and the young squire.

It must have been about mid-day when Rattray reappeared, ruddy, spurred,
and splashed with mud; a comfort to sick eyes, I declare, in spite
of all. He brought me two little vials, put one on the chimney-piece,
poured the other into my tumbler, and added a little water.

“There, old fellow,” said he; “swallow that, and if you don't get some
sleep the chemist who made it up is the greatest liar unhung.”

“What is it?' I asked, the glass in my hand, and my eyes on those of my
companion.

“I don't know,” said he. “I just told them to make up the strongest
sleeping-draught that was safe, and I mentioned something about your
case. Toss it off, man; it's sure to be all right.”

Yes, I could trust him; he was not that sort of villain, for all that
Eva Denison had said. I liked his face as well as ever. I liked his eye,
and could have sworn to its honesty as I drained the glass. Even had it
been otherwise, I must have taken my chance or shown him all; as it was,
when he had pulled down my blind, and shaken my pillow, and he gave
me his hand once more, I took it with involuntary cordiality. I only
grieved that so fine a young fellow should have involved himself in so
villainous a business; yet for Eva's sake I was glad that he had; for
my mind failed (rather than refused) to believe him so black as she had
painted him.

The long, long afternoon that followed I never shall forget. The opiate
racked my head; it did not do its work; and I longed to sleep till
evening with a longing I have never known before or since. Everything
seemed to depend upon it; I should be a man again, if only I could
first be a log for a few hours. But no; my troubles never left me for an
instant; and there I must lie, pretending that they had! For the other
draught was for the night; and if they but thought the first one had
taken due effect, so much the less would they trouble their heads about
me when they believed that I had swallowed the second.

Oh, but it was cruel! I lay and wept with weakness and want of sleep;
ere night fell I knew that it would find me useless, if indeed my reason
lingered on. To lie there helpless when Eva was expecting me, that would
be the finishing touch. I should rise a maniac if ever I rose at
all. More probably I would put one of my five big bullets into my own
splitting head; it was no small temptation, lying there in a double
agony, with the loaded weapon by my side.

Then sometimes I thought it was coming; and perhaps for an instant would
be tossing in my hen-coop; then back once more. And I swear that
my physical and mental torments, here in my bed, would have been
incomparably greater than anything I had endured on the sea, but for the
saving grace of one sweet thought. She lived! She lived! And the God who
had taken care o me, a castaway, would surely deliver her also from
the hands of murderers and thieves. But not through me--I lay weak and
helpless--and my tears ran again and yet again as I felt myself growing
hourly weaker.

I remember what a bright fine day it was, with the grand open country
all smiles beneath a clear, almost frosty sky, once when I got up on
tip-toe and peeped out. A keen wind whistled about the cottage; I felt
it on my feet as I stood; but never have I known a more perfect and
invigorating autumn day. And there I must lie, with the manhood ebbing
Out of me, the manhood that I needed so for the night! I crept back into
bed. I swore that I would sleep. Yet there I lay, listening sometimes to
that vile woman's tread below; sometimes to mysterious whispers, between
whom I neither knew nor cared; anon to my watch ticking by my side, to
the heart beating in my body, hour after hour--hour after hour. I prayed
as I have seldom prayed. I wept as I have never wept. I railed and
blasphemed--not with my lips, because the woman must think I was
asleep--but so much the more viciously in my heart.

Suddenly it turned dark. There were no gradations--not even a tropical
twilight. One minute I aw the sun upon the blind; the next--thank God!
Oh, thank God! No light broke any longer through the blind; just a faint
and narrow glimmer stole between it and the casement; and the light that
had been bright golden was palest silver now.

It was the moon. I had been in dreamless sleep for hours.

The joy of that discovery! The transport of waking to it, and waking
refreshed! The swift and sudden miracle that it seemed! I shall never,
never forget it, still less the sickening thrill of fear which was
cruelly quick to follow upon my joy. The cottage was still as the tomb.
What if I had slept too long!

With trembling hand I found my watch.

Luckily I had wound it in the early morning. I now carried it to the
window, drew back the blind, and held it in the moonlight. It was not
quite ten o'clock. And yet the cottage was so still--so still.

I stole to the door, opened it by cautious degrees, and saw the
reflection of a light below. Still not a sound could I hear, save the
rapid drawing of my own breath, and the startled beating of my own
heart.

I now felt certain that the Braithwaites were out, and dressed hastily,
making as little noise as possible, and still hearing absolutely none
from below. Then, feeling faint with hunger, though a new being after my
sleep, I remembered a packet of sandwiches which I had not opened on my
journey north. These I transferred from my travelling-bag (where they
had lain forgotten to my jacket pocket), before drawing down the blind,
leaving the room on tip-toe, and very gently fastening the door behind
me. On the stairs, too, I trod with the utmost caution, feeling the wall
with my left hand (my right was full), lest by any chance I might
be mistaken in supposing I had the cottage to myself. In spite of my
caution there came a creak at every step. And to my sudden horror I
heard a chair move in the kitchen below.

My heart and I stood still together. But my right hand tightened on
stout wood, my right forefinger trembled against thin steel. The sound
was not repeated. And at length I continued on my way down, my teeth
set, an excuse on my lips, but determination in every fibre of my frame.

A shadow lay across the kitchen floor; it was that of the deaf mute, as
he stood on a chair before the fire, supporting himself on the chimney
piece with one puny arm, while he reached overhead with the other. I
stood by for an instant, glorying in the thought that he could not hear
me; the next, I saw what it was he was reaching up for--a bell-mouthed
blunderbuss--and I knew the little devil for the impostor that he was.

“You touch it,” said I, “and you'll drop dead on that hearth.”

He pretended not to hear me, but he heard the click of the splendid
spring which Messrs. Deane and Adams had put into that early revolver of
theirs, and he could not have come down much quicker with my bullet in
his spine.

“Now, then,” I said, “what the devil do you mean by shamming deaf and
dumb?”

“I niver said I was owt o' t' sort,” he whimpered, cowering behind the
chair in a sullen ague.

“But you acted it, and I've a jolly good mind to shoot you dead!”
 (Remember, I was so weak myself that I thought my arm would break from
presenting my five chambers and my ten-inch barrel; otherwise I should
be sorry to relate how I bullied that mouse of a man.) “I may let you
off,” I continued, “if you answer questions. Where's your wife?”

“Eh, she'll be back directly!” said Braithwaite, with some tact; but his
look was too cunning to give the warning weight. “I've a bullet to spare
for her,” said I, cheerfully; “now, then, where is she?”

“Gone wi' the oothers, for owt I knaw.”

“And where are the others gone?”

“Where they allus go, ower to t' say.”

“Over to the sea, eh? We're getting on! What takes them there?”

“That's more than I can tell you, sir,” said Braithwaite, with so much
emphasis and so little reluctance as to convince me that for once at
least he had spoken the truth. There was even a spice of malice in his
tone. I began to see possibilities in the little beast.

“Well,” I said, “you're a nice lot! I don't know what your game is, and
don't want to. I've had enough of you without that. I'm off to-night.”

“Before they get back?” asked Braithwaite, plainly in doubt about his
duty, and yet as plainly relieved to learn the extent of my intention.

“Certainly,” said I; “why not? I'm not particularly anxious to see your
wife again, and you may ask Mr. Rattray from me why the devil he led
me to suppose you were deaf and dumb? Or, if you like, you needn't say
anything at all about it,” I added, seeing his thin jaw fall; “tell him
I never found you out, but just felt well enough to go, and went. When
do you expect them back?”

“It won't be yet a bit,” said he.

“Good! Now look here. What would you say to these?” And I showed him a
couple of sovereigns: I longed to offer him twenty, but feared to excite
his suspicions. “These are yours if you have a conveyance at the end of
the lane--the lane we came up the night before last--in an hour's time.”

His dull eyes glistened; but a tremor took him from top to toe, and he
shook his head.

“I'm ill, man!” I cried. “If I stay here I'll die! Mr. Rattray knows
that, and he wanted me to go this morning; he'll be only too thankful to
find me gone.”

This argument appealed to him; indeed, I was proud of it.

“But I was to stop an' look after you,” he mumbled; “it'll get me into
trooble, it will that!”

I took out three more sovereigns; not a penny higher durst I go.

“Will five pounds repay you? No need to tell your wife it was five, you
know! I should keep four of them all to myself.”

The cupidity of the little wretch was at last overcoming his abject
cowardice. I could see him making up his miserable mind. And I still
flatter myself that I took only safe (and really cunning) steps to
precipitate the process. To offer him more money would have been
madness; instead, I poured it all back into my pocket.

“All right!” I cried; “you're a greedy, cowardly, old idiot, and I'll
just save my money.” And out I marched into the moonlight, very briskly,
towards the lane; he was so quick to follow me that I had no fears of
the blunderbuss, but quickened my step, and soon had him running at my
heels.

“Stop, stop, sir! You're that hasty wi' a poor owd man.” So he whimpered
as he followed me like the little cur he was.

“I'm hanged if I stop,” I answered without looking back; and had him
almost in tears before I swung round on him so suddenly that he yelped
with fear. “What are you bothering me for?” I blustered. “Do you want me
to wring your neck?”

“Oh, I'll go, sir! I'll go, I'll go,” he moaned.

“I've a good mind not to let you. I wouldn't if I was fit to walk five
miles.”

“But I'll roon 'em, sir! I will that! I'll go as fast as iver I can!”

“And have a conveyance at the road-end of the lane as near an hour hence
as you possibly can?”

“Why, there, sir!” he cried, crassly inspired; “I could drive you in our
own trap in half the time.”

“Oh, no, you couldn't! I--I'm not fit to be out at all; it must be a
closed conveyance; but I'll come to the end of the lane to save time,
so let him wait there. You needn't wait yourself; here's a sovereign
of your money, and I'll leave the rest in the jug in my bedroom. There!
It's worth your while to trust me, I think. As for my luggage, I'll
write to Mr. Rattray about that. But I'll be shot if I spend another
night on his property.”

I was rid of him at last; and there I stood, listening to his headlong
steps, until they stumbled out of earshot down the lane; then back to
the cottage, at a run myself, and up to my room to be no worse than my
word. The sovereigns plopped into the water and rang together at
the bottom of the jug. In another minute I was hastening through the
plantation, in my hand the revolver that had served me well already, and
was still loaded and capped in all five chambers.




CHAPTER XIV. IN THE GARDEN


It so happened that I met nobody at all; but I must confess that my
luck was better than my management. As I came upon the beck, a new sound
reached me with the swirl. It was the jingle of bit and bridle; the beat
of hoofs came after; and I had barely time to fling myself flat, when
two horsemen emerged from the plantation, riding straight towards me in
the moonlight. If they continued on that course they could not fail
to see me as they passed along the opposite bank. However, to my
unspeakable relief, they were scarce clear of the trees when they turned
their horses' heads, rode them through the water a good seventy yards
from where I lay, and so away at a canter across country towards the
road. On my hands and knees I had a good look at them as they bobbed up
and down under the moon; and my fears subsided in astonished curiosity.
For I have already boasted of my eyesight, and I could have sworn that
neither Rattray nor any one of his guests was of the horsemen; yet the
back and shoulders of one of these seemed somehow familiar to me. Not
that I wasted many moments over the coincidence, for I had other things
to think about as I ran on to the hall.

I found the rear of the building in darkness unrelieved from within; on
the other hand, the climbing moon beat so full upon the garden wall, it
was as though a lantern pinned me as I crept beneath it. In passing I
thought I might as well try the gate; but Eva was right; it was locked;
and that made me half inclined to distrust my eyes in the matter of the
two horsemen, for whence could they have come, if not from the hall?
In any case I was well rid of them. I now followed the wall some little
distance, and then, to see over it, walked backwards until I was all but
in the beck; and there, sure enough, shone my darling's candle, close as
close against the diamond panes of her narrow, lofty window! It brought
those ready tears back to my foolish, fevered eyes. But for sentiment
there was no time, and every other emotion was either futile or
premature. So I mastered my full heart, I steeled, my wretched nerves,
and braced my limp muscles for the task that lay before them.

I had a garden wall to scale, nearly twice my own height, and without
notch or cranny in the ancient, solid masonry. I stood against it on my
toes, and I touched it with my finger-tips as high up as possible. Some
four feet severed them from the coping that left only half a sky above
my upturned eyes.

I do not know whether I have made it plain that the house was not
surrounded by four walls, but merely filled a breach in one of the
four, which nipped it (as it were) at either end. The back entrance was
approachable enough, but barred or watched, I might be very sure. It is
ever the vulnerable points which are most securely guarded, and it was
my one comfort that the difficult way must also be the safe way, if only
the difficulty could be overcome. How to overcome it was the problem.
I followed the wall right round to the point at which it abutted on the
tower that immured my love; the height never varied; nor could my hands
or eyes discover a single foot-hole, ledge, or other means of mounting
to the top.

Yet my hot head was full of ideas; and I wasted some minutes in trying
to lift from its hinges a solid, six-barred, outlying gate, that my
weak arms could hardly stir. More time went in pulling branches from the
oak-trees about the beck, where the latter ran nearest to the moonlit
wall. I had an insane dream of throwing a long forked branch over
the coping, and so swarming up hand-over-hand. But even to me the
impracticability of this plan came home at last. And there I stood in a
breathless lather, much time and strength thrown away together; and the
candle burning down for nothing in that little lofty window; and the
running water swirling noisily over its stones at my back.

This was the only sound; the wind had died away; the moonlit valley
lay as still as the dread old house in its midst but for the splash and
gurgle of the beck. I fancied this grew louder as I paused and listened
in my helplessness. All at once--was it the tongue of Nature telling me
the way, or common gumption returning at the eleventh hour? I ran down
to the water's edge, and could have shouted for joy. Great stones lay in
equal profusion on bed and banks. I lifted one of the heaviest in both
hands. I staggered with it to the wall. I came back for another; for
some twenty minutes I was so employed; my ultimate reward a fine heap of
boulders against the wall.

Then I began to build; then mounted my pile, clawing the wall to keep
my balance. My fingers were still many inches from the coping. I jumped
down and gave another ten minutes to the back-breaking work of carrying
more boulders from the water to the wall. Then I widened my cairn below,
so that I could stand firmly before springing upon the pinnacle with
which I completed it. I knew well that this would collapse under me if
I allowed my weight to rest more than an instant upon it. And so at last
it did; but my fingers had clutched the coping in time; had grabbed it
even as the insecure pyramid crumbled and left me dangling.

Instantly exerting what muscle I had left, and the occasion gave me,
I succeeded in pulling myself up until my chin was on a level with my
hands, when I flung an arm over and caught the inner coping. The other
arm followed; then a leg; and at last I sat astride the wall, panting
and palpitating, and hardly able to credit my own achievement. One great
difficulty had been my huge revolver. I had been terribly frightened it
might go off, and had finally used my cravat to sling it at the back
of my neck. It had shifted a little, and I was working it round again,
preparatory to my drop, when I saw the light suddenly taken from the
window in the tower, and a kerchief waving for one instant in its place.
So she had been waiting and watching for me all these hours! I dropped
into the garden in a very ecstasy of grief and rapture, to think that I
had been so long in coming to my love, but that I had come at last. And
I picked myself up in a very frenzy of fear lest, after all, I should
fail to spirit her from this horrible place.

Doubly desolate it looked in the rays of that bright October moon.
Skulking in the shadow of the wall which had so long baffled me, I
looked across a sharp border of shade upon a chaos, the more striking
for its lingering trim design. The long, straight paths were barnacled
with weeds; the dense, fine hedges, once prim and angular, had fattened
out of all shape or form; and on the velvet sward of other days you
might have waded waist high in rotten hay. Towards the garden end this
rank jungle merged into a worse wilderness of rhododendrons, the tallest
I have ever seen. On all this the white moon smiled, and the grim house
glowered, to the eternal swirl and rattle of the beck beyond its walls.

Long enough I stood where I had dropped, listening with all my being
for some other sound; but at last that great studded door creaked
and shivered on its ancient hinges, and I heard voices arguing in the
Portuguese tongue. It was poor Eva wheedling that black rascal Jose.
I saw her in the lighted porch; the nigger I saw also, shrugging and
gesticulating for all the world like his hateful master; yet giving in,
I felt certain, though I could not understand a word that reached me.

And indeed my little mistress very soon sailed calmly out, followed by
final warnings and expostulations hurled from the step: for the black
stood watching her as she came steadily my way, now raising her head to
sniff the air, now stooping to pluck up a weed, the very picture of a
prisoner seeking the open air for its own sake solely. I had a keen eye
apiece for them as I cowered closer to the wall, revolver in hand. But
ere my love was very near me (for she would stand long moments gazing
ever so innocently at the moon), her jailer had held a bottle to the
light, and had beaten a retreat so sudden and so hasty that I expected
him back every moment, and so durst not stir. Eva saw me, however,
and contrived to tell me so without interrupting the air that she was
humming as she walked.

“Follow me,” she sang, “only keep as you are, keep as you are, close to
the wall, close to the wall.”

And on she strolled to her own tune, and came abreast of me without
turning her head; so I crept in the shadow (my ugly weapon tucked out of
sight), and she sauntered in the shine, until we came to the end of
the garden, where the path turned at right angles, running behind the
rhododendrons; once in their shelter, she halted and beckoned me, and
next instant I had her hands in mine.

“At last!” was all that I could say for many a moment, as I stood there
gazing into her dear eyes, no hero in my heroic hour, but the bigger
love-sick fool than ever. “But quick--quick--quick!” I added, as she
brought me to my senses by withdrawing her hands. “We've no time to
lose.” And I looked wildly from wall to wall, only to find them as
barren and inaccessible on this side as on the other.

“We have more time than you think,” were Eva's first words. “We can do
nothing for half-an-hour.”

“Why not?”

“I'll tell you in a minute. How did you manage to get over?”

“Brought boulders from the beck, and piled 'em up till I could reach the
top.”

I thought her eyes glistened.

“What patience!” she cried softly. “We must find a simpler way of
getting out--and I think I have. They've all gone, you know, but Jose.”

“All three?”

“The captain has been gone all day.”

Then the other two must have been my horse-men, very probably in some
disguise; and my head swam with the thought of the risk that I had run
at the very moment when I thought myself safest. Well, I would have
finished them both! But I did not say so to Eva. I did not mention
the incident, I was so fearful of destroying her confidence in me.
Apologizing, therefore, for my interruption, without explaining it, I
begged her to let me hear her plan.

It was simple enough. There was no fear of the others returning before
midnight; the chances were that they would be very much later; and
now it was barely eleven, and Eva had promised not to stay out above
half-an-hour. When it was up Jose would come and call her.

“It is horrid to have to be so cunning!” cried little Eva, with an angry
shudder; “but it's no use thinking of that,” she was quick enough to
add, “when you have such dreadful men to deal with, such fiends! And I
have had all day to prepare, and have suffered till I am so desperate I
would rather die to-night than spend another in that house. No; let me
finish! Jose will come round here to look for me. But you and I will
be hiding on the other side of these rhododendrons. And when we hear him
here we'll make a dash for it across the long grass. Once let us get the
door shut and locked in his face, and he'll be in a trap. It will take
him some time to break in; time enough to give us a start; what's more,
when he finds us gone, he'll do what they all used to do in any doubt.”

“What's that?”

“Say nothing till it's found out; then lie for their lives; and it was
their lives, poor creatures on the Zambesi!” She was silent a moment,
her determined little face hard--set upon some unforgotten horror.
“Once we get away, I shall be surprised if it's found out till morning,”
 concluded Eva, without a word as to what I was to do with her; neither,
indeed, had I myself given that question a moment's consideration.

“Then let's make a dash for it now!” was all I said or thought.

“No; they can't come yet, and Jose is strong and brutal, and I
have heard how ill you are. That you should have come to me
notwithstanding--” and she broke off with her little hands lying
so gratefully on my shoulders, that I know not how I refrained from
catching her then and there to my heart. Instead, I laughed and said
that my illness was a pure and deliberate sharp, and my presence there
its direct result. And such was the virtue in my beloved's voice, the
magic of her eyes, the healing of her touch, that I was scarce conscious
of deceit, but felt a whole man once more as we two stood together in
the moonlight.

In a trance I stood there gazing into her brave young eyes. In a
trance I suffered her to lead me by the hand through the rank, dense
rhododendrons. And still entranced I crouched by her side near the
further side, with only unkempt grass-plot and a weedy path between us
and that ponderous door, wide open still, and replaced by a section of
the lighted hail within. On this we fixed our attention with mingled
dread and impatience, those contending elements of suspense; but the
black was slow to reappear; and my eyes stole home to my sweet girl's
face, with its glory of moonlit curls, and the eager, resolute,
embittered look that put the world back two whole months, and Eva
Denison upon the Lady Jermyn's poop, in the ship's last hours. But it
was not her look alone; she had on her cloak, as the night before,
but with me (God bless her!) she found no need to clasp herself in its
folds; and underneath she wore the very dress in which she had sung at
our last concert, and been rescued in the gig. It looked as though she
had worn it ever since. The roses were crushed and soiled, the tulle all
torn, and tarnished some strings of beads that had been gold: a tatter
of Chantilly lace hung by a thread: it is another of the relics that I
have unearthed in the writing of this narrative.

“I thought men never noticed dresses?” my love said suddenly, a pleased
light in her eyes (I thought) in spite of all. “Do you really remember
it?”

“I remember every one of them,” I said indignantly; and so I did.

“You will wonder why I wear it,” said Eva, quickly. “It was the first
that came that terrible night. They have given me many since. But I
won't wear one of them--not one!”

How her eyes flashed! I forgot all about Jose.

“I suppose you know why they hadn't room for you in the gig?” she went
on.

“No, I don't know, and I don't care. They had room for you,” said I;
“that's all I care about.” And to think she could not see I loved her!

“But do you mean to say you don't know that these--murderers--set fire
to the ship?”

“No--yes! I heard you say so last night.”

“And you don't want to know what for?”

Out of politeness I protested that I did; but, as I live, all I wanted
to know just then was whether my love loved me--whether she ever
could--whether such happiness was possible under heaven!

“You remember all that mystery about the cargo?” she continued eagerly,
her pretty lips so divinely parted!

“It turned out to be gunpowder,” said I, still thinking only of her.

“No--gold!”

“But it was gunpowder,” I insisted; for it was my incorrigible passion
for accuracy which had led up to half our arguments on the voyage; but
this time Eva let me off.

“It was also gold: twelve thousand ounces from the diggings. That was
the real mystery. Do you mean to say you never guessed?”

“No, by Jove I didn't!” said I. She had diverted my interest at last. I
asked her if she had known on board.

“Not until the last moment. I found out during the fire. Do you remember
when we said good-by? I was nearly telling you then.”

Did I remember! The very letter of that last interview was cut deep in
my heart; not a sleepless night had I passed without rehearsing it word
for word and look for look; and sometimes, when sorrow had spent itself,
and the heart could bleed no more, vain grief had given place to vainer
speculation, and I had cudgelled my wakeful brains for the meaning of
the new and subtle horror which I had read in my darling's eyes at the
last. Now I understood; and the one explanation brought such a tribe
in its train, that even the perilous ecstasy of the present moment was
temporarily forgotten in the horrible past.

“Now I know why they wouldn't have me in the gig!” I cried softly.

“She carried four heavy men's weight in gold.”

“When on earth did they get it aboard?”

“In provision boxes at the last; but they had been filling the boxes for
weeks.”

“Why, I saw them doing it!” I cried. “But what about the gig? Who picked
you up?”

She was watching that open door once more, and she answered with notable
indifference, “Mr. Rattray.”

“So that's the connection!” said I; and I think its very simplicity was
what surprised me most.

“Yes; he was waiting for us at Ascension.”

“Then it was all arranged?”

“Every detail.”

“And this young blackguard is as bad as any of them!”

“Worse,” said she, with bitter brevity. Nor had I ever seen her look so
hard but once, and that was the night before in the old justice hall,
when she told Rattray her opinion of him to his face. She had now the
same angry flush, the same set mouth and scornful voice; and I took
it finally into my head that she was unjust to the poor devil, villain
though he was. With all his villainy I declined to believe him as bad
as the others. I told her so in as many words. And in a moment we were
arguing as though we were back on the Lady Jermyn with nothing else to
do.

“You may admire wholesale murderers and thieves,” said Eva. “I do not.”

“Nor I. My point is simply that this one is not as bad as the rest. I
believe he was really glad for my sake when he discovered that I knew
nothing of the villainy. Come now, has he ever offered you any personal
violence?”

“Me? Mr. Rattray? I should hope not, indeed!”

“Has he never saved you from any?”

“I--I don't know.”

“Then I do. When you left them last night there was some talk of
bringing you back by force. You can guess who suggested that--and who
set his face against it and got his way. You would think the better of
Rattray had you heard what passed.”

“Should I?” she asked half eagerly, as she looked quickly round at me;
and suddenly I saw her eyes fill. “Oh, why will you speak about him?”
 she burst out. “Why must you defend him, unless it's to go against me,
as you always did and always will! I never knew anybody like you--never!
I want you to take me away from these wretches, and all you do is to
defend them!”

“Not all,” said I, clasping her hand warmly in mine. “Not all--not all!
I will take you away from them, never fear; in another hour God grant
you may be out of their reach for ever!”

“But where are we to go?” she whispered wildly. “What are you to do with
me? All my friends think me dead, and if they knew I was not it would
all come out.”

“So it shall,” said I; “the sooner the better; if I'd had my way it
would all be out already.”

I see her yet, my passionate darling, as she turned upon me, whiter than
the full white moon.

“Mr. Cole,” said she, “you must give me your sacred promise that so far
as you are concerned, it shall never come out at all!”

“This monstrous conspiracy? This cold blooded massacre?”

And I crouched aghast.

“Yes; it could do no good; and, at any rate, unless you promise I remain
where I am.”

“In their hands?”

“Decidedly--to warn them in time. Leave them I would, but betray
them--never!”

What could I say? What choice had I in the face of an alternative so
headstrong and so unreasonable? To rescue Eva from these miscreants I
would have let every malefactor in the country go unscathed: yet the
condition was a hard one; and, as I hesitated, my love went on her knees
to me, there in the moonlight among the rhododendrons.

“Promise--promise--or you will kill me!” she gasped. “They may deserve
it richly, but I would rather be torn in little pieces than--than have
them--hanged!”

“It is too good for most of them.”

“Promise!”

“To hold my tongue about them all?”

“Yes--promise!”

“Promise!”

“When a hundred lives were sacrificed--”

“Promise!”

“I can't,” I said. “It's wrong.”

“Then good-by!” she cried, starting to her feet.

“No--no--” and I caught her hand.

“Well, then?”

“I--promise.”




CHAPTER XV. FIRST BLOOD


So I bound myself to a guilty secrecy for Eva's sake, to save her from
these wretches, or if you will, to win her for myself. Nor did it
strike me as very strange, after a moment's reflection, that she should
intercede thus earnestly for a band headed by her own mother's widower,
prime scoundrel of them all though she knew him to be. The only
surprise was that she had not interceded in his name; that I should have
forgotten, and she should have allowed me to forget, the very existence
of so indisputable a claim upon her loyalty. This, however, made it a
little difficult to understand the hysterical gratitude with which my
unwilling promise was received. Poor darling! she was beside herself
with sheer relief. She wept as I had never seen her weep before. She
seized and even kissed my hands, as one who neither knew nor cared what
she did, surprising me so much by her emotion that this expression of it
passed unheeded. I was the best friend she had ever had. I was her one
good friend in all the world; she would trust herself to me; and if I
would but take her to the convent where she had been brought up, she
would pray for me there until her death, but that would not be very
long.

All of which confused me utterly; it seemed an inexplicable breakdown
in one who had shown such nerve and courage hitherto, and so hearty a
loathing for that damnable Santos. So completely had her presence of
mind forsaken her that she looked no longer where she had been gazing
hitherto. And thus it was that neither of us saw Jose until we heard
him calling, “Senhora Evah! Senhora Evah!” with some rapid sentences in
Portuguese.

“Now is our time,” I whispered, crouching lower and clasping a small
hand gone suddenly cold. “Think of nothing now but getting out of this.
I'll keep my word once we are out; and here's the toy that's going to
get us out.” And I produced my Deane and Adams with no small relish.

A little trustful pressure was my answer and my reward; meanwhile the
black was singing out lustily in evident suspicion and alarm.

“He says they are coming back,” whispered Eva; “but that's impossible.”

“Why?”

“Because if they were he couldn't see them, and if he heard them he
would be frightened of their hearing him. But here he comes!”

A shuffling quick step on the path; a running grumble of unmistakable
threats; a shambling moonlit figure seen in glimpses through the leaves,
very near us for an instant, then hidden by the shrubbery as he passed
within a few yards of our hiding-place. A diminuendo of the
shuffling steps; then a cursing, frightened savage at one end of the
rhododendrons, and we two stealing out at the other, hand in hand, and
bent quite double, into the long neglected grass.

“Can you run for it?” I whispered.

“Yes, but not too fast, for fear we trip.'

“Come on, then!”

The lighted open doorway grew greater at every stride.

“He hasn't seen us yet--”

“No, I hear him threatening me still.”

“Now he has, though!”

A wild whoop proclaimed the fact, and upright we tore at top speed
through the last ten yards of grass, while the black rushed down one of
the side paths, gaining audibly on us over the better ground. But our
start had saved us, and we flew up the steps as his feet ceased to
clatter on the path; he had plunged into the grass to cut off the
corner.

“Thank God!” cried Eva. “Now shut it quick.”

The great door swung home with a mighty clatter, and Eva seized the key
in both hands.

“I can't turn it!”

To lose a second was to take a life, and unconsciously I was sticking
at that, perhaps from no higher instinct than distrust of my aim. Our
pursuer, however, was on the steps when I clapped my free hand on top of
those little white straining ones, and by a timely effort bent both them
and the key round together; the ward shot home as Jose hurled himself
against the door. Eva bolted it. But the thud was not repeated, and I
gathered myself together between the door and the nearest window, for by
now I saw there was but one thing for us. The nigger must be disabled,
if I could manage such a nicety; if not, the devil take his own.

Well, I was not one tick too soon for him. My pistol was not cocked
before the crash came that I was counting on, and with it a shower of
small glass driving across the six-foot sill and tinkling on the flags.
Next came a black and bloody face, at which I could not fire. I had
to wait till I saw his legs, when I promptly shattered one of them at
disgracefully short range. The report was as deafening as one upon the
stage; the hall filled with white smoke, and remained hideous with the
bellowing of my victim. I searched him without a qualm, but threats
of annihilation instead, and found him unarmed but for that very knife
which Rattray had induced me to hand over to him in town. I had a grim
satisfaction in depriving him of this, and but small compunction in
turning my back upon his pain.

“Come,” I said to poor Eva, “don't pity him, though I daresay he's the
most pitiable of the lot; show me the way through, and I'll follow with
this lamp.”

One was burning on the old oak table. I carried it along a narrow
passage, through a great low kitchen where I bumped my head against the
black oak beams; and I held it on high at a door almost as massive as
the one which we had succeeded in shutting in the nigger's face.

“I was afraid of it!” cried Eva, with a sudden sob.

“What is it?”

“They've taken away the key!”

Yes, the keen air came through an empty keyhole; and my lamp, held
close, not only showed that the door was locked, but that the lock was
one with which an unskilled hand might tamper for hours without result.
I dealt it a hearty kick by way of a test. The heavy timber did not
budge; there was no play at all at either lock or hinges; nor did I see
how I could spend one of my four remaining bullets upon the former, with
any chance of a return.

“Is this the only other door?”

“Then it must be a window.”

“All the back ones are barred.”

“Securely?”

“Yes.”

“Then we've no choice in the matter.”

And I led the way back to the hall, where the poor black devil lay
blubbering in his blood. In the kitchen I found the bottle of wine
(Rattray's best port, that they were trying to make her take for her
health) with which Eva had bribed him, and I gave it to him before
laying hands on a couple of chairs.

“What are you going to do?”'

“Go out the way we came.”

“But the wall?”

“Pile up these chairs, and as many more as we may need, if we can't open
the gate.”

But Eva was not paying attention any longer, either to me or to Jose;
his white teeth were showing in a grin for all his pain; her eyes were
fixed in horror on the floor.

“They've come back,” she gasped. “The underground passage! Hark--hark!”

There was a muffled rush of feet beneath our own, then a dull but very
distinguishable clatter on some invisible stair.

“Underground passage!” I exclaimed, and in my sheer disgust I forgot
what was due to my darling. “Why on earth didn't you tell me of it
before?”

“There was so much to tell you! It leads to the sea. Oh, what shall we
do? You must hide--upstairs--anywhere!” cried Eva, wildly. “Leave them
to me--leave them to me.”

“I like that,” said I; and I did; but I detested myself for the tears my
words had drawn, and I prepared to die for them.

“They'll kill you, Mr. Cole!”

“It would serve me right; but we'll see about it.”

And I stood with my revolver very ready in my right hand, while with
the other I caught poor Eva to my side, even as a door flew open,
and Rattray himself burst upon us, a lantern in his hand, and the
perspiration shining on his handsome face in its light.

I can see him now as he stood dumfounded on the threshold of the hall;
and yet, at the time, my eyes sped past him into the room beyond.

It was the one I have described as being lined with books; there was
a long rent in this lining, where the books had opened with a door,
through which Captain Harris, Joaquin Santos, and Jane Braithwaite
followed Rattray in quick succession, the men all with lanterns, the
woman scarlet and dishevelled even for her. It was over the squire's
shoulders I saw their faces; he kept them from passing him in the
doorway by a free use of his elbows; and when I looked at him again, his
black eyes were blazing from a face white with passion, and they were
fixed upon me.

“What the devil brings you here?” he thundered at last.

“Don't ask idle questions,” was my reply to that.

“So you were shamming to-day!”

“I was taking a leaf out of your book.”

“You'll gain nothing by being clever!” sneered the squire, taking
a threatening step forward. For at the last moment I had tucked my
revolver behind my back, not only for the pleasure, but for the obvious
advantage of getting them all in front of me and off their guard. I
had no idea that such eyes as Rattray's could be so fierce: they were
dancing from me to my companion, whom their glitter frightened into an
attempt to disengage herself from me; but my arm only tightened about
her drooping figure.

“I shall gain no more than I expect,” said I, carelessly. “And I know
what to expect from brave gentlemen like you! It will be better than
your own fate, at all events; anything's better than being taken hence
to the place of execution, and hanged by the neck until you're dead, all
three of you in a row, and your bodies buried within the precincts of
the prison!”

“The very thing for him,” murmured Santos. “The--very--theeng!”

“But I'm so soft-hearted,” I went insanely on, “that I should be sorry
to see that happen to such fine fellows as you are. Come out of that,
you little fraud behind there!” It was my betrayer skulking in the
room. “Come out and line up with the rest! No, I'm not going to see you
fellows dance on nothing; I've another kind of ball apiece for you, and
one between 'em for the Braithwaites!”

Well, I suppose I always had a nasty tongue in me, and rather enjoyed
making play with it on provocation; but, if so, I met with my deserts
that night. For the nigger of the Lady Jermyn lay all but hid behind Eva
and me; if they saw him at all, they may have thought him drunk; but, as
for myself, I had fairly forgotten his existence until the very moment
came for showing my revolver, when it was twisted out of my grasp
instead, and a ball sang under my arm as the brute fell back exhausted
and the weapon clattered beside him. Before I could stoop for it there
was a dead weight on my left arm, and Squire Rattray was over the table
at a bound, with his arms jostling mine beneath Eva Denison's senseless
form.

“Leave her to me,” he cried fiercely. “You fool,” he added in a lower
key, “do you think I'd let any harm come to her?”

I looked him in the bright and honest eyes that had made me trust him
in the beginning. And I did not utterly distrust him yet. Rather was the
guile on my side as I drew back and watched Rattray lift the young girl
tenderly, and slowly carry her to the door by which she had entered and
left the hall just twenty-four hours before. I could not take my eyes
off them till they were gone. And when I looked for my revolver, it also
had disappeared.

Jose had not got it--he lay insensible. Santos was whispering to Harris.
Neither of them seemed armed. I made sure that Rattray had picked it up
and carried it off with Eva. I looked wildly for some other weapon. Two
unarmed men and a woman were all I had to deal with, for Braithwaite
had long since vanished. Could I but knock the worthless life out of the
men, I should have but the squire and his servants to deal with; and in
that quarter I still had my hopes of a bloodless battle and a treaty of
war.

A log fire was smouldering in the open grate. I darted to it, and had a
heavy, half-burned brand whirling round my head next instant. Harris was
the first within my reach. He came gamely at me with his fists. I sprang
upon him, and struck him to the ground with one blow, the sparks flying
far and wide as my smoking brand met the seaman's skull. Santos was upon
me next instant, and him, by sheer luck, I managed to serve the same;
but I doubt whether either man was stunned; and I was standing ready for
them to rise, when I felt myself seized round the neck from behind, and
a mass of fluffy hair tickling my cheek, while a shrill voice set up a
lusty scream for the squire.

I have said that the woman Braithwaite was of a sinister strength; but I
had little dreamt how strong she really was. First it was her arms
that wound themselves about my neck, long, sinuous, and supple as the
tentacles of some vile monster; then, as I struggled, her thumbs were on
my windpipe like pads of steel. Tighter she pressed, and tighter yet. My
eyeballs started; my tongue lolled; I heard my brand drop, and through
a mist I saw it picked up instantly. It crashed upon my skull as I still
struggled vainly; again and again it came down mercilessly in the same
place; until I felt as though a sponge of warm water had been squeezed
over my head, and saw a hundred withered masks grinning sudden
exultation into mine; but still the lean arm whirled, and the splinters
flew, till I was blind with my blood and the seven senses were beaten
out of me.




CHAPTER XVI. A DEADLOCK


It must have been midnight when I opened my eyes; a clock was striking
as though it never would stop. My mouth seemed fire; a pungent flavor
filled my nostrils; the wineglass felt cold against my teeth. “That's
more like it!” muttered a voice close to my ear. An arm was withdrawn
from under my shoulders. I was allowed to sink back upon some pillows.
And now I saw where I was. The room was large and poorly lighted. I lay
in my clothes on an old four-poster bed. And my enemies were standing
over me in a group.

“I hope you are satisfied!” sneered Joaquin Santos, with a flourish of
his eternal cigarette.

“I am. You don't do murder in my house, wherever else you may do it.”

“And now better lid 'im to the nirrest polissstation; or weel you go
and tell the poliss yourself?” asked the Portuguese, in the same tone of
mordant irony.

“Ay, ay,” growled Harris; “that's the next thing!”

“No,” said Rattray; “the next thing's for you two to leave him to me.”

“We'll see you damned!” cried the captain.

“No, no, my friend,” said Santos, with a shrug; “let him have his way.
He is as fond of his skeen as you are of yours; he'll come round to our
way in the end. I know this Senhor Cole. It is necessary for 'im to die.
But it is not necessary this moment; let us live them together for a
leetle beet.”

“That's all I ask,” said Rattray.

“You won't ask it twice,” rejoined Santos, shrugging. “I know this
Senhor Cole. There is only one way of dilling with a man like that.
Besides, he 'as 'alf-keeled my good Jose; it is necessary for 'im to
die.”

“I agree with the senhor,” said Harris, whose forehead was starred
with sticking-plaster. “It's him or us, an' we're all agen you, squire.
You'll have to give in, first or last.”

And the pair were gone; their steps grew faint in the corridor; when we
could no longer hear them, Rattray closed the door and quietly locked
it. Then he turned to me, stern enough, and pointed to the door with a
hand that shook.

“You see how it is?”

“Perfectly.”

“They want to kill you!”

“Of course they do.”

“It's your own fault; you've run yourself into this. I did my best to
keep you out of it. But in you come, and spill first blood.”

“I don't regret it,” said I.

“Oh, you're damned mule enough not to regret anything!” cried Rattray.
“I see the sort you are; yet but for me, I tell you plainly, you'd be a
dead man now.”

“I can't think why you interfered.”

“You've heard the reason. I won't have murder done here if I can prevent
it; so far I have; it rests with you whether I can go on preventing it
or not.”

“With me, does it?”

He sat down on the side of the bed. He threw an arm to the far side of
my body, and he leaned over me with savage eyes now staring into mine,
now resting with a momentary gleam of pride upon my battered head. I put
up my hand; it lit upon a very turban of bandages, and at that I tried
to take his hand in mine. He shook it off, and his eyes met mine more
fiercely than before.

“See here, Cole,” said he; “I don t know how the devil you got wind of
anything to start with, and I don't care. What I do know is that you've
made bad enough a long chalk worse for all concerned, and you'll have to
get yourself out of the mess you've got yourself into, and there's only
one way. I suppose Miss Denison has really told you everything this
time? What's that? Oh, yes, she's all right again; no thanks to you. Now
let's hear what she did tell you. It'll save time.”

I repeated the hurried disclosures made by Eva in the rhododendrons. He
nodded grimly in confirmation of their truth.

“Yes, those are the rough facts. The game was started in Melbourne. My
part was to wait at Ascension till the Lady Jermyn signalled herself,
follow her in a schooner we had bought and pick up the gig with the gold
aboard. Well, I did so; never mind the details now, and never mind the
bloody massacre the others had made of it before I came up. God knows I
was never a consenting party to that, though I know I'm responsible.
I'm in this thing as deep as any of them. I've shared the risks and I'm
going to share the plunder, and I'll swing with the others if it ever
comes to that. I deserve it hard enough. And so here we are, we three
and the nigger, all four fit to swing in a row, as you were fool enough
to tell us; and you step in and find out everything. What's to be done?
You know what the others want to do. I say it rests with you whether
they do it or not. There's only one other way of meeting the case.”

“What's that?”

“Be in it yourself, man! Come in with me and split my share!”

I could have burst out laughing in his handsome, eager face; the good
faith of this absurd proposal was so incongruously apparent; and so
obviously genuine was the young villain's anxiety for my consent. Become
accessory after the fact in such a crime! Sell my silence for a price! I
concealed my feelings with equal difficulty and resolution. I had plans
of my own already, but I must gain time to think them over. Nor could I
afford to quarrel with Rattray meanwhile.

“What was the haul?” I asked him, with the air of one not unprepared to
consider the matter.

“Twelve thousand ounces!”

“Forty-eight thousand pounds, about?”

“Yes-yes.”

“And your share?”

“Fourteen thousand pounds. Santos takes twenty, and Harris and I
fourteen thousand each.”

“And you offer me seven?”

“I do! I do!”

He was becoming more and more eager and excited. His eyes were brighter
than I had ever seen them, but slightly bloodshot, and a coppery flush
tinged his clear, sunburnt skin. I fancied he had been making somewhat
free with the brandy. But loss of blood had cooled my brain; and,
perhaps, natural perversity had also a share in the composure which grew
upon me as it deserted my companion.

“Why make such a sacrifice?” said I, smiling. “Why not let them do as
they like?”

“I've told you why! I'm not so bad as all that. I draw the line at
bloody murder! Not a life should have been lost if I'd had my way.
Besides, I've done all the dirty work by you, Cole; there's been no
help for it. We didn't know whether you knew or not; it made all the
difference to us; and somebody had to dog you and find out how much you
did know. I was the only one who could possibly do it. God knows how I
detested the job! I'm more ashamed of it than of worse things. I had to
worm myself into your friendship; and, by Jove, you made me think you
did know, but hadn't let it out, and might any day. So then I got you up
here, where you would be in our power if it was so; surely you can see
every move? But this much I'll swear--I had nothing to do with Jose
breaking into your room at the hotel; they went behind me there, curse
them! And when at last I found out for certain, down here, that you knew
nothing after all, I was never more sincerely thankful in my life. I
give you my word it took a load off my heart.”

“I know that,” I said. “I also know who broke into my room, and I'm glad
I'm even with one of you.”

“It's done you no good,” said Rattray. “Their first thought was to put
you out of the way, and it's more than ever their last. You see the sort
of men you've got to deal with; and they're three to one, counting the
nigger; but if you go in with me they'll only be three to two.”

He was manifestly anxious to save me in this fashion. And I suppose that
most sensible men, in my dilemma, would at least have nursed or played
upon good-will so lucky and so enduring. But there was always a twist in
me that made me love (in my youth) to take the unexpected course; and it
amused me the more to lead my young friend on.

“And where have you got this gold?” I asked him, in a low voice so
promising that he instantly lowered his, and his eyes twinkled naughtily
into mine.

“In the old tunnel that runs from this place nearly to the sea,” said
he. “We Rattrays have always been a pretty warm lot, Cole, and in the
old days we were the most festive smugglers on the coast; this tunnel's
a relic of 'em, although it was only a tradition till I came into the
property. I swore I'd find it, and when I'd done so I made the new
connection which you shall see. I'm rather proud of it. And I won't say
I haven't used the old drain once or twice after the fashion of my rude
forefathers; but never was it such a godsend as it's been this time. By
Jove, it would be a sin if you didn't come in with us, Cole; but for the
lives these blackguards lost the thing's gone splendidly; it would be a
sin if you went and lost yours, whereas, if you come in, the two of us
would be able to shake off those devils: we should be too strong for
'em.”

“Seven thousand pounds!” I murmured. “Forty-eight thousand between us!”

“Yes, and nearly all of it down below, at this end of the tunnel, and
the rest where we dropped it when we heard you were trying to bolt. We'd
got it all at the other end, ready to pop aboard the schooner that's
lying there still, if you turned out to know anything and to have told
what you knew to the police. There was always the possibility of that,
you see; we simply daren't show our noses at the bank until we knew how
much you knew, and what you'd done or were thinking of doing. As it is,
we can take 'em the whole twelve thousand ounces, or rather I can, as
soon as I like, in broad daylight. I'm a lucky digger. It's all right.
Everybody knows I've been out there. They'll have to pay me over the
counter; and if you wait in the cab, by the Lord Harry, I'll pay you
your seven thousand first! You don't deserve it, Cole, but you shall
have it, and between us we'll see the others to blazes!”

He jumped up all excitement, and was at the door next instant.

“Stop!” I cried. “Where are you going?”

“Downstairs to tell them.”

“Tell them what?”

“That you're going in with me, and it's all right.”

“And do you really think I am?”

He had unlocked the door; after a pause I heard him lock it again. But
I did not see his face until he returned to the bedside. And then it
frightened me. It was distorted and discolored with rage and chagrin.

“You've been making a fool of me!” he cried fiercely.

“No, I have been considering the matter, Rattray.”

“And you won't accept my offer?”

“Of course I won't. I didn't say I'd been considering that.”

He stood over me with clenched fists and starting eyes.

“Don't you see that I want to save your life?” he cried. “Don't you see
that this is the only way? Do you suppose a murder more or less makes
any difference to that lot downstairs? Are you really such a fool as to
die rather than hold your tongue?”

“I won't hold it for money, at all events,” said I. “But that's what I
was coming to.”

“Very well!” he interrupted. “You shall only pretend to touch it. All I
want is to convince the others that it's against your interest to split.
Self-interest is the one motive they understand. Your bare word would be
good enough for me.”

“Suppose I won't give my bare word?” said I, in a gentle manner which I
did not mean to be as irritating as it doubtless was. Yet his proposals
and his assumptions were between them making me irritable in my turn.

“For Heaven's sake don't be such an idiot, Cole!” he burst out in a
passion. “You know I'm against the others, and you know what they want,
yet you do your best to put me on their side! You know what they are,
and yet you hesitate! For the love of God be sensible; at least give me
your word that you'll hold your tongue for ever about all you know.”

“All right,” I said. “I'll give you my word--my sacred promise,
Rattray--on one condition.”

“What's that?”

“That you let me take Miss Denison away from you, for good and all!”

His face was transformed with fury: honest passion faded from it and
left it bloodless, deadly, sinister.

“Away from me?” said Rattray, through his teeth.

“From the lot of you.”

“I remember! You told me that night. Ha, ha, ha! You were in love with
her--you--you!”

“That has nothing to do with it,” said I, shaking the bed with my anger
and my agitation.

“I should hope not! You, indeed, to look at her!”

“Well,” I cried, “she may never love me; but at least she doesn't loathe
me as she loathes you--yes, and the sight of you, and your very name!”

So I drew blood for blood; and for an instant I thought he was going to
make an end of it by incontinently killing me himself. His fists flew
out. Had I been a whole man on my legs, he took care to tell me what he
would have done, and to drive it home with a mouthful of the oaths which
were conspicuously absent from his ordinary talk.

“You take advantage of your weakness, like any cur,” he wound up.

“And you of your strength--like the young bully you are!” I retorted.

“You do your best to make me one,” he answered bitterly. “I try to stand
by you at all costs. I want to make amends to you, I want to prevent
a crime. Yet there you lie and set your face against a compromise; and
there you lie and taunt me with the thing that's gall and wormwood to me
already. I know I gave you provocation. And I know I'm rightly served.
Why do you suppose I went into this accursed thing at all? Not for the
gold, my boy, but for the girl! So she won't look at me. And it serves
me right. But--I say--do you really think she loathes me, Cole?”

“I don't see how she can think much better of you than of the crime
in which you've had a hand,” was my reply, made, however, with as much
kindness as I could summon. “The word I used was spoken in anger,” said
I; for his had disappeared; and he looked such a miserable, handsome dog
as he stood there hanging his guilty head--in the room, I fancied, where
he once had lain as a pretty, innocent child.

“Cole,” said he, “I'd give twice my share of the damned stuff never to
have put my hand to the plough; but go back I can't; so there's an end
of it.”

“I don't see it,” said I. “You say you didn't go in for the gold? Then
give up your share; the others'll jump at it; and Eva won't think the
worse of you, at any rate.”

“But what's to become of her if I drop out?

“You and I will take her to her friends, or wherever she wants to go.”

“No, no!” he cried. “I never yet deserted my pals, and I'm not going to
begin.”

“I don't believe you ever before had such pals to desert,” was my reply
to that. “Quite apart from my own share in the matter, it makes me
positively sick to see a fellow like you mixed up with such a crew in
such a game. Get out of it, man, get out of it while you can! Now's your
time. Get out of it, for God's sake!”

I sat up in my eagerness. I saw him waver. And for one instant a great
hope fluttered in my heart. But his teeth met. His face darkened. He
shook his head.

“That's the kind of rot that isn't worth talking, and you ought to know
it,” said he. “When I begin a thing I go through with it, though it
lands me in hell, as this one will. I can't help that. It's too late to
go back. I'm going on and you're going with me, Cole, like a sensible
chap!”

I shook my head.

“Only on the one condition.”

“You--stick--to--that?” he said, so rapidly that the words ran into one,
so fiercely that his decision was as plain to me as my own.

“I do,” said I, and could only sigh when he made yet one more effort to
persuade me, in a distress not less apparent than his resolution, and
not less becoming in him.

“Consider, Cole, consider!”

“I have already done so, Rattray.”

“Murder is simply nothing to them!”

“It is nothing to me either.”

“Human life is nothing!”

“No; it must end one day.”

“You won't give your word unconditionally?”

“No; you know my condition.”

He ignored it with a blazing eye, his hand upon the door.

“You prefer to die, then?” “Infinitely.”

“Then die you may, and be damned to you!”




CHAPTER XVII. THIEVES FALL OUT


The door slammed. It was invisibly locked and the key taken out. I
listened for the last of an angry stride. It never even began. But after
a pause the door was unlocked again, and Rattray re-entered.

Without looking at me, he snatched the candle from the table on which it
stood by the bedside, and carried it to a bureau at the opposite side
of the room. There he stood a minute with his back turned, the candle,
I fancy, on the floor. I saw him putting something in either jacket
pocket. Then I heard a dull little snap, as though he had shut some
small morocco case; whatever it was, he tossed it carelessly back into
the bureau; and next minute he was really gone, leaving the candle
burning on the floor.

I lay and heard his steps out of earshot, and they were angry enough
now, nor had he given me a single glance. I listened until there was
no more to be heard, and then in an instant I was off the bed and on
my feet. I reeled a little, and my head gave me great pain, but greater
still was my excitement. I caught up the candle, opened the unlocked
bureau, and then the empty case which I found in the very front.

My heart leapt; there was no mistaking the depressions in the case. It
was a brace of tiny pistols that Rattray had slipped into his jacket
pockets.

Mere toys they must have been in comparison with my dear Deane and
Adams; that mattered nothing. I went no longer in dire terror of my
life; indeed, there was that in Rattray which had left me feeling fairly
safe, in spite of his last words to me, albeit I felt his fears on my
behalf to be genuine enough. His taking these little pistols (of
course, there were but three chambers left loaded in mine) confirmed my
confidence in him.

He would stick at nothing to defend me from the violence of his
bloodthirsty accomplices. But it should not come to that. My legs were
growing firmer under me. I was not going to lie there meekly without
making at least an effort at self-deliverance. If it succeeded--the
idea came to me in a flash--I would send Rattray an ultimatum from the
nearest town; and either Eva should be set instantly and unconditionally
free, or the whole matter be put unreservedly in the hands of the local
police.

There were two lattice windows, both in the same immensely thick wall;
to my joy, I discovered that they overlooked the open premises at the
back of the hall, with the oak-plantation beyond; nor was the distance
to the ground very great. It was the work of a moment to tear the sheets
from the bed, to tie the two ends together and a third round the mullion
by which the larger window was bisected. I had done this, and had let
down my sheets, when a movement below turned my heart to ice. The night
had clouded over. I could see nobody; so much the greater was my alarm.

I withdrew from the window, leaving the sheets hanging, in the hope that
they also might be invisible in the darkness. I put out the candle,
and returned to the window in great perplexity. Next moment I stood
aghast--between the devil and the deep sea. I still heard a something
down below, but a worse sound came to drown it. An unseen hand was very
quietly trying the door which Rattray had locked behind him.

“Diablo!” came to my horrified ears, in a soft, vindictive voice.

“I told ye so,” muttered another; “the young swab's got the key.”

There was a pause, in which it would seem that Joaquin Santos had his
ear at the empty keyhole.

“I think he must be slipping,” at last I heard him sigh. “It was not
necessary to awaken him in this world. It is a peety.”

“One kick over the lock would do it,” said Harris; “only the young
swab'll hear.”

“Not perhaps while he is dancing attendance on the senhora. Was it not
good to send him to her? If he does hear, well, his own turn will come
the queecker, that is all. But it would be better to take them one at a
time; so keeck away, my friend, and I will give him no time to squil.”

While my would-be murderers were holding this whispered colloquy, I had
stood half-petrified by the open window; unwilling to slide down the
sheets into the arms of an unseen enemy, though I had no idea which
of them it could be; more hopeful of slipping past my butchers in the
darkness, and so to Rattray and poor Eva; but not the less eagerly
looking for some hiding-place in the room. The best that offered was a
recess in the thick wall between the two windows, filled with hanging
clothes: a narrow closet without a door, which would shelter me well
enough if not too curiously inspected. Here I hid myself in the end,
after a moment of indecision which nearly cost me my life. The coats and
trousers still shook in front of me when the door flew open at the first
kick, and Santos stood a moment in the moonlight, looking for the bed.
With a stride he reached it, and I saw the gleam of a knife from where I
stood among the squire's clothes; it flashed over my bed, and was still.

“He is not 'ere!”

“He heard us, and he's a-hiding.”

“Make light, my friend, and we shall very soon see.”

Harris did so.

“Here's a candle,” said Santos; “light it, and watch the door. Perro mal
dicto! What have we here?”

I felt certain he had seen me, but the candle passed within a yard of my
feet, and was held on high at the open window.

“We are too late!” said Santos. “He's gone!”

“Are you sure

“Look at this sheet.”

“Then the other swab knew of it, and we'll settle with him.”

“Yes, yes. But not yet, my good friend--not yet. We want his asseestance
in getting the gold back to the sea; he will be glad enough to give it,
now that his pet bird has flown; after that--by all mins. You shall cut
his troth, and I will put one of 'is dear friend's bullets in 'im for my
own satisfaction.”

There was a quick step on the stairs-in the corridor.

“I'd like to do it now,” whispered Harris; “no time like the present.”

“Not yet, I tell you!”

And Rattray was in the room, a silver-mounted pistol in each hand; the
sight of these was a surprise to his treacherous confederates, as even I
could see.

“What the devil are you two doing here?” he thundered.

“We thought he was too quite,” said Santos. “You percive the rizzon.”

And he waved from empty bed to open window, then held the candle close
to the tied sheet, and shrugged expressively.

“You thought he was too quiet!” echoed Rattray with fierce scorn. “You
thought I was too blind--that's what you mean. To tell me that Miss
Denison wished to see me, and Miss Denison that I wished to speak to
her! As if we shouldn't find you out in about a minute! But a minute was
better than nothing, eh? And you've made good use of your minute, have
you. You've murdered him, and you pretend he's got out? By God, if you
have, I'll murder you! I've been ready for this all night!”

And he stood with his back to the window, his pistols raised, and his
head carried proudly--happily--like a man whose self-respect was coming
back to him after many days. Harris shrank before his fierce eyes
and pointed barrels. The Portuguese, however, had merely given a
characteristic shrug, and was now rolling the inevitable cigarette.

“Your common sense is almost as remarkable as your sense of justice, my
friend,” said he. “You see us one, two, tree meenutes ago, and you see
us now. You see the empty bed, the empty room, and you imagine that in
one, two, tree meenutes we have killed a man and disposed of his body.
Truly, you are very wise and just, and very loyal also to your friends.
You treat a dangerous enemy as though he were your tween-brother. You
let him escape--let him, I repit--and then you threaten to shoot those
who, as it is, may pay for your carelessness with their lives. We have
been always very loyal to you, Senhor Rattray. We have leestened to your
advice, and often taken it against our better judgment. We are here, not
because we think it wise, but because you weeshed it. Yet at the first
temptation you turn upon us, you point your peestols at your friends.”

“I don't believe in your loyalty,” rejoined Rattray. “I believe you
would shoot me sooner than I would you. The only difference would be
than I should be shot in the back!”

“It is untrue,” said Santos, with immense emotion. “I call the saints to
witness that never by thought or word have I been disloyal to you”--and
the blasphemous wretch actually crossed himself with a trembling, skinny
hand. “I have leestened to you, though you are the younger man. I have
geeven way to you in everything from the moment we were so fullish as to
set foot on this accursed coast; that also was your doeeng; and it will
be your fault if ivil comes of it. Yet I have not complained. Here
in your own 'ouse you have been the master, I the guest. So far from
plotting against you, show me the man who has heard me brith one
treacherous word behind your back; you will find it deeficult, friend
Rattray; what do you say, captain?”

“Me?” cried Harris, in a voice bursting with abuse. And what the captain
said may or may not be imagined. It cannot be set down.

But the man who ought to have spoken--the man who had such a chance as
few men have off the stage--who could have confounded these villains
in a breath, and saved the wretched Rattray at once from them and
from himself--that unheroic hero remained ignobly silent in his homely
hiding-place. And, what is more, he would do the same again!

The rogues had fallen out; now was the time for honest men. They all
thought I had escaped; therefore they would give me a better chance than
ever of still escaping; and I have already explained to what purpose
I meant to use my first hours of liberty. That purpose I hold to have
justified any ingratitude that I may seem now to have displayed towards
the man who had undoubtedly stood between death and me. Was not Eva
Denison of more value than many Rattrays? And it was precisely in
relation with this pure young girl that I most mistrusted the squire:
obviously then my first duty was to save Eva from Rattray, not Rattray
from these traitors.

Not that I pretend for a moment to have been the thing I never was: you
are not so very grateful to the man who pulls you out of the mud when he
has first of all pushed you in; nor is it chivalry alone which spurs
one to the rescue of a lovely lady for whom, after all, one would rather
live than die. Thus I, in my corner, was thinking (I will say) of Eva
first; but next I was thinking of myself; and Rattray's blood be on his
own hot head! I hold, moreover, that I was perfectly right in all this;
but if any think me very wrong, a sufficient satisfaction is in store
for them, for I was very swiftly punished.

The captain's language was no worse in character than in effect: the bed
was bloody from my wounded head, all tumbled from the haste with which
I had quitted it, and only too suggestive of still fouler play. Rattray
stopped the captain with a sudden flourish of one of his pistols, the
silver mountings making lightning in the room; then he called upon the
pair of them to show him what they had done with me; and to my horror,
Santos invited him to search the room. The invitation was accepted. Yet
there I stood. It would have been better to step forward even then. Yet
I cowered among his clothes until his own hand fell upon my collar, and
forth I was dragged to the plain amazement of all three.

Santos was the first to find his voice.

“Another time you will perhaps think twice before you spik, friend
squire.”

Rattray simply asked me what I had been doing in there, in a white flame
of passion, and with such an oath that I embellished the truth for him
in my turn.

“Trying to give you blackguards the slip,” said I.

“Then it was you who let down the sheet?”

“Of course it was.”

“All right! I'm done with you,” said he; “that settles it. I make you an
offer. You won't accept it. I do my best; you do your worst; but I'll be
shot if you get another chance from me!”

Brandy and the wine-glass stood where Rattray must have set them, on an
oak stool beside the bed; as he spoke he crossed the room, filled
the glass till the spirit dripped, and drained it at a gulp. He was
twitching and wincing still when he turned, walked up to Joaquin Santos,
and pointed to where I stood with a fist that shook.

“You wanted to deal with him,” said Rattray; “you're at liberty to do
so. I'm only sorry I stood in your way.”

But no answer, and for once no rings of smoke came from those shrivelled
lips: the man had rolled and lighted a cigarette since Rattray entered,
but it was burning unheeded between his skinny fingers. I had his
attention, all to myself. He knew the tale that I was going to tell.
He was waiting for it; he was ready for me. The attentive droop of his
head; the crafty glitter in his intelligent eyes; the depth and
breadth of the creased forehead; the knowledge of his resource, the
consciousness of my error, all distracted and confounded me so that my
speech halted and my voice ran thin. I told Rattray every syllable that
these traitors had been saying behind his back, but I told it all very
ill; what was worse, and made me worse, I was only too well aware of my
own failure to carry conviction with my words.

“And why couldn't you come out and say so,” asked Rattray, as even I knew
that he must. “Why wait till now?”

“Ah, why!” echoed Santos, with a smile and a shake of the head; a
suspicious tolerance, an ostentatious truce, upon his parchment face.
And already he was sufficiently relieved to suck his cigarette alight
again.

“You know why,” I said, trusting to bluff honesty with the one of them
who was not rotten to the core: “because I still meant escaping.”

“And then what?” asked Rattray fiercely.

“You had given me my chance,” I said; “I hould have given you yours.”

“You would, would you? Very kind of you, Mr. Cole!”

“No, no,” said Santos; “not kind, but clever! Clever, spicious, and
queeck-weeted beyond belif! Senhor Rattray, we have all been in the
dark; we thought we had fool to die with, but what admirable knave the
young man would make! Such readiness, such resource, with his tongue
or with his peestol; how useful would it be to us! I am glad you have
decided to live him to me, friend Rattray, for I am quite come round to
your way of thinking. It is no longer necessary for him to die!”

“You mean that?” cried Rattray keenly.

“Of course I min it. You were quite right. He must join us. But he will
when I talk to him.”

I could not speak. I was fascinated by this wretch: it was reptile and
rabbit with us. Treachery I knew he meant; my death, for one; my death
was certain; and yet I could not speak.

“Then talk to him, for God's sake,” cried Rattray, “and I shall be only
too glad if you can talk some sense into him. I've tried, and failed.”

“I shall not fail,” said Santos softly. “But it is better that he has a
leetle time to think over it calmly; better steel for 'im to slip upon
it, as you say. Let us live 'im for the night, what there is of it; time
enough in the morning.”

I could hardly believe my ears; still I knew that it was treachery, all
treachery; and the morning I should never see.

“But we can't leave him up here,” said Rattray; “it would mean one of us
watching him all night.”

“Quite so,” said Santos. “I will tell you where we could live him,
however, if you will allow me to wheesper one leetle moment.”

They drew aside; and, as I live, I thought that little moment was to
be Rattray's last on earth. I watched, but nothing happened; on the
contrary, both men seemed agreed, the Portuguese gesticulating, the
Englishman nodding, as they stood conversing at the window. Their faces
were strangely reassuring. I began to reason with myself, to rid my mind
of mere presentiment and superstition. If these two really were at one
about me (I argued) there might be no treachery after all. When I came
to think of it, Rattray had been closeted long enough with me to awake
the worst suspicions in the breasts of his companions; now that these
were allayed, there might be no more bloodshed after all (if, for
example, I pretended to give in), even though Santos had not cared whose
blood was shed a few minutes since. That was evidently the character of
the wretch: to compass his ends or to defend his person he would take
life with no more compunction than the ordinary criminal takes money;
but (and hence) murder for murder's sake was no amusement to him.

My confidence was further restored by Captain Harris; ever a gross
ruffian, with no refinements to his rascality, he had been at the brandy
bottle after Rattray's example; and now was dozing on the latter's bed,
taking his watch below when he could get it, like the good seaman he
had been. I was quite sorry for him when the conversation at the window
ceased suddenly, and Rattray roused the captain up.

“Watches aft!” said he. “We want that mattress; you can bring it along,
while I lead the way with the pillows and things. Come on, Cole!”

“Where to?” I asked, standing firm.

“Where there's no window for you to jump out of, old boy, and no clothes
of mine for you to hide behind. You needn't look so scared; it's as dry
as a bone, as cellars go. And it's past three o'clock. And you've just
got to come.”




CHAPTER XVIII. A MAN OF MANY MURDERS


It was a good-sized wine-cellar, with very little wine in it; only one
full bin could I discover. The bins themselves lined but two of the
walls, and most of them were covered in with cobwebs, close-drawn like
mosquito-curtains. The ceiling was all too low: torpid spiders hung
in disreputable parlors, dead to the eye, but loathsomely alive at an
involuntary touch. Rats scuttled when we entered, and I had not been
long alone when they returned to bear me company. I am not a natural
historian, and had rather face a lion with the right rifle than a rat
with a stick. My jailers, however, had been kind enough to leave me a
lantern, which, set upon the ground (like my mattress), would afford a
warning, if not a protection, against the worst; unless I slept; and as
yet I had not lain down. The rascals had been considerate enough, more
especially Santos, who had a new manner for me with his revised opinion
of my character; it was a manner almost as courtly as that which had
embellished his relations with Eva Denison, and won him my early regard
at sea. Moreover, it was at the suggestion of Santos that they had
detained me in the hall, for much-needed meat and drink, on the way
down. Thereafter they had conducted me through the book-lined door of my
undoing, down stone stairs leading to three cellar doors, one of which
they had double-locked upon me.

As soon as I durst I was busy with this door; but to no purpose; it was
a slab of solid oak, hung on hinges as massive as its lock. It galled
me to think that but two doors stood between me and the secret tunnel to
the sea: for one of the other two must lead to it. The first, however,
was all beyond me, and I very soon gave it up. There was also a
very small grating which let in a very little fresh air: the massive
foundations had been tunnelled in one place; a rude alcove was the
result, with this grating at the end and top of it, some seven feet
above the earth floor. Even had I been able to wrench away the bars, it
would have availed me nothing, since the aperture formed the segment of
a circle whose chord was but a very few inches long. I had nevertheless
a fancy for seeing the stars once more and feeling the breath of heaven
upon my bandaged temples, which impelled me to search for that which
should add a cubit to my stature. And at a glance I descried two
packing-cases, rather small and squat, but the pair of them together
the very thing for me. To my amazement, however, I could at first move
neither one nor the other of these small boxes. Was it that I was weak
as water, or that they were heavier than lead? At last I managed to get
one of them in my arms--only to drop it with a thud. A side started;
a thin sprinkling of yellow dust glittered on the earth. I fetched the
lantern: it was gold-dust from Bendigo or from Ballarat.

To me there was horror unspeakable, yet withal a morbid fascination,
in the spectacle of the actual booty for which so many lives had been
sacrificed before my eyes. Minute followed minute in which I looked at
nothing, and could think of nothing, but the stolen bullion at my feet;
then I gathered what of the dust I could, pocketed it in pinches to hide
my meddlesomeness, and blew the rest away. The box had dropped very much
where I had found it; it had exhausted my strength none the less, and
I was glad at last to lie down on the mattress, and to wind my body in
Rattray's blankets.

I shuddered at the thought of sleep: the rats became so lively the
moment I lay still. One ventured so near as to sit up close to the
lantern; the light showed its fat white belly, and the thing itself was
like a dog begging, as big to my disgusted eyes. And yet, in the midst
of these horrors (to me as bad as any that had preceded them), nature
overcame me, and for a space my torments ceased.

“He is aslip,” a soft voice said.

“Don't wake the poor devil,” said another.

“But I weesh to spik with 'im. Senhor Cole! Senhor Cole!”

I opened my eyes. Santos looked of uncanny stature in the low yellow
light, from my pillow close to the earth. Harris turned away at my
glance; he carried a spade, and began digging near the boxes without
more ado, by the light of a second lantern set on one of them: his back
was to me from this time on. Santos shrugged a shoulder towards the
captain as he opened a campstool, drew up his trousers, and seated
himself with much deliberation at the foot of my mattress.

“When you 'ave treasure,” said he, “the better thing is to bury it,
Senhor Cole. Our young friend upstairs begs to deefer; but he is
slipping; it is peety he takes such quantity of brandy! It is leetle
wikness of you Engleesh; we in Portugal never touch it, save as a
liqueur; therefore we require less slip. Friend squire upstairs is at
this moment no better than a porker. Have I made mistake? I thought it
was the same word in both languages; but I am glad to see you smile,
Senhor Cole; that is good sign. I was going to say, he is so fast aslip
up there, that he would not hear us if we were to shoot each other
dead!”

And he gave me his paternal smile, benevolent, humorous, reassuring; but
I was no longer reassured; nor did I greatly care any more what happened
to me. There is a point of last, as well as one of least resistance, and
I had reached both points at once.

“Have you shot him dead?” I inquired, thinking that if he had, this
would precipitate my turn. But he was far from angry; the parchment
face crumpled into tolerant smiles; the venerable head shook a playful
reproval, as he threw away the cigarette that I am tired of mentioning,
and put the last touch to a fresh one with his tongue.

“What question?” said he; “reely, Senhor Cole! But you are quite right:
I would have shot him, or cut his troth” (and he shrugged indifference
on the point), “if it had not been for you; and yet it would have been
your fault! I nid not explain; the poseetion must have explained itself
already; besides, it is past. With you two against us--but it is past.
You see, I have no longer the excellent Jose. You broke his leg, bad
man. I fear it will be necessary to destroy 'im.” Santos made a pause;
then inquired if he shocked me.

“Not a bit,” said I, neither truly nor untruly; “you interest me.” And
that he did.

“You see,” he continued, “I have not the respect of you Engleesh for
'uman life. We will not argue it. I have at least some respect for
prejudice. In my youth I had myself such prejudices; but one loses them
on the Zambesi. You cannot expect one to set any value upon the life of
a black nigger; and when you have keeled a great many Kaffirs, by the
lash, with the crocodiles, or what-not, then a white man or two makes
less deeference. I acknowledge there were too many on board that sheep;
but what was one to do? You have your Engleesh proverb about the dead
men and the stories; it was necessary to make clin swip. You see the
result.”

He shrugged again towards the boxes; but this time, being reminded
of them (I supposed), he rose and went over to see how Harris was
progressing. The captain had never looked round; neither did he look at
Santos. “A leetle dipper,” I heard the latter say, “and, perhaps, a few
eenches--” but I lost the last epithet. It followed a glance over the
shoulder in my direction, and immediately preceded the return of Santos
to his camp-stool.

“Yes, it is always better to bury treasure,” said he once more; but his
tone was altered; it was more contemplative; and many smoke-rings came
from the shrunk lips before another word; but through them all, his dark
eyes, dull with age, were fixed upon me.

“You are a treasure!” he exclaimed at last, softly enough, but quickly
and emphatically for him, and with a sudden and most diabolical smile.

“So you are going to bury me?”

I had suspected it when first I saw the spade; then not; but since the
visit to the hole I had made up my mind to it.

“Bury you? No, not alive,” said Santos, in his playfully reproving
tone. “It would be necessary to deeg so dip!” he added through his few
remaining teeth.

“Well,” I said, “you'll swing for it. That's something.”

Santos smiled again, benignantly enough this time: in contemplation
also: as an artist smiles upon his work. I was his!

“You live town,” said he; “no one knows where you go. You come down
here; no one knows who you are. Your dear friend squire locks you up
for the night, but dreenks too much and goes to slip with the key in his
pocket; it is there when he wakes; but the preesoner, where is he? He is
gone, vanished, escaped in the night, and, like the base fabreec of your
own poet's veesion, he lives no trace--is it trace?--be'ind! A leetle
earth is so easily bitten down; a leetle more is so easily carried up
into the garden; and a beet of nice strong wire might so easily be
found in a cellar, and afterwards in the lock! No, Senhor Cole, I do not
expect to 'ang. My schims have seldom one seengle flaw. There was just
one in the Lady Jermyn; there was--Senhor Cole! If there is one this
time, and you will be so kind as to point it out, I will--I will run the
reesk of shooting you instead of--”

A pinch of his baggy throat, between the fingers and thumbs of both
hands, foreshadowed a cleaner end; and yet I could look at him; nay, it
was more than I could do not to look upon that bloodless face, with the
two dry blots upon the parchment, that were never withdrawn from mine.

“No you won't, messmate! If it's him or us for it, let a bullet do it,
and let it do it quick, you bloody Spaniard! You can't do the other
without me, and my part's done.”

Harris was my only hope. I had seen this from the first, but my appeal
I had been keeping to the very end. And now he was leaving me before a
word would come! Santos had gone over to my grave, and there was Harris
at the door!

“It is not dip enough,” said the Portuguese.

“It's as deep as I mean to make it, with you sittin' there talkin' about
it.”

And the door stood open.

“Captain!” I screamed. “For Christ's sake, captain!”

He stood there, trembling, yet even now not looking my way.

“Did you ever see a man hanged?” asked Santos, with a vile eye for each
of us. “I once hanged fifteen in a row; abominable thifs. And I once
poisoned nearly a hundred at one banquet; an untrustworthy tribe; but
the hanging was the worse sight and the worse death. Heugh! There was
one man--he was no stouter than you are captain--”

But the door slammed; we heard the captain on the stairs; there was a
rustle from the leaves outside, and then a silence that I shall not
attempt to describe.

And, indeed, I am done with this description: as I live to tell the tale
(or spoil it, if I choose) I will make shorter work of this particular
business than I found it at the time. Perverse I may be in old age as
in my youth; but on that my agony--my humiliating agony--I decline
to dwell. I suffer it afresh as I write. There are the cobwebs on the
ceiling, a bloated spider crawling in one: a worse monster is gloating
over me: those dull eyes of his, and my own pistol-barrel, cover me in
the lamp-light. The crucifix pin is awry in his cravat; that is because
he has offered it me to kiss. As a refinement (I feel sure) my revolver
is not cocked; and the hammer goes up--up--

He missed me because a lantern was flashed into his eyes through the
grating. He wasted the next ball in firing wildly at the light. And
the last chamber's load became suddenly too precious for my person; for
there were many voices overhead; there were many feet upon the stairs.

Harris came first--head-first--saw me still living as he reeled--hurled
himself upon the boxes and one of these into the hole--all far quicker
than my pen can write it. The manoeuvre, being the captain's, explained
itself: on his heels trod Rattray, with one who brought me to my feet
like the call of silver trumpets.

“The house is surrounded,” says the squire, very quick and quiet; “is
this your doing, Cole?”

“I wish it was,” said I; “but I can't complain; it's saved my life.”
 And I looked at Santos, standing dignified and alert, my still smoking
pistol in his hand.

“Two things to do,” says Rattray--“I don't care which.” He strode across
the cellar and pulled at the one full bin; something slid out, it was a
binful of empty bottles, and this time they were allowed to crash upon
the floor; the squire stood pointing to a manhole at the back of the
bin. “That's one alternative,” said he; “but it will mean leaving this
much stuff at least,” pointing to the boxes, “and probably all the rest
at the other end. The other thing's to stop and fight!”

“I fight,” said Santos, stalking to the door. “Have you no more
ammunition for me, friend Cole? Then I must live you alive; adios,
senhor!”

Harris cast a wistful look towards the manhole, not in cowardice, I
fancy, but in sudden longing for the sea, the longing of a poor devil
of a sailor-man doomed to die ashore. I am still sorry to remember that
Rattray judged him differently. “Come on, skipper,” said he; “it's all
or none aboard the lugger, and I think it will be none. Up you go; wait
a second in the room above, and I'll find you an old cutlass. I shan't
be longer.” He turned to me with a wry smile. “We're not half-armed,” he
said; “they've caught us fairly on the hop; it should be fun! Good-by,
Cole; I wish you'd had another round for that revolver. Good-by, Eva!”

And he held out his hand to our love, who had been watching him all this
time with eyes of stone; but now she turned her back upon him without
a word. His face changed; the stormlight of passion and remorse played
upon it for an instant; he made a step towards her, wheeled abruptly,
and took me by the shoulder instead.

“Take care of her, Cole,” said he. “Whatever happens--take care of her.”

I caught him at the foot of the stairs. I do not defend what I did. But
I had more ammunition; a few wadded bullets, caps, and powder-charges,
loose in a jacket pocket; and I thrust them into one of his, upon a
sudden impulse, not (as I think) altogether unaccountable, albeit (as I
have said) so indefensible.

My back was hardly turned an instant. I had left a statue of unforgiving
coldness. I started round to catch in my arms a half-fainting,
grief-stricken form, shaken with sobs that it broke my heart to hear. I
placed her on the camp-stool. I knelt down and comforted her as well as
I could, stroking her hands, my arm about her heaving shoulders, with
the gold-brown hair streaming over them. Such hair as it was! So much
longer than I had dreamt. So soft--so fine--my soul swam with the sight
and touch of it. Well for me that there broke upon us from above such
a sudden din as turned my hot blood cold! A wild shout of surprise; an
ensuing roar of defiance; shrieks and curses; yells of rage and pain;
and pistol-shot after pistol-shot as loud as cannon in the confined
space.

I know now that the battle in the hall was a very brief affair; while
it lasted I had no sense of time; minutes or moments, they were (God
forgive me!) some of the very happiest in all my life. My joy was as
profound as it was also selfish and incongruous. The villains were being
routed; of that there could be no doubt or question. I hoped Rattray
might escape, but for the others no pity stirred in my heart, and even
my sneaking sympathy with the squire could take nothing from the joy
that was in my heart. Eva Denison was free. I was free. Our oppressors
would trouble us no more. We were both lonely; we were both young; we
had suffered together and for each other. And here she lay in my arms,
her head upon my shoulder, her soft bosom heaving on my own! My blood
ran hot and cold by turns. I forgot everything but our freedom and my
love. I forgot my sufferings, as I would have you all forget them. I
am not to be pitied. I have been in heaven on earth. I was there that
night, in my great bodily weakness, and in the midst of blood-shed,
death, and crime.

“They have stopped!” cried Eva suddenly. “It is over! Oh, if he is
dead!”

And she sat upright, with bright eyes starting from a deathly face. I do
not think she knew that she had been in my arms at all: any more than I
knew that the firing had ceased before she told me. Excited voices were
still raised overhead; but some sounded distant, yet more distinct,
coming through the grating from the garden; and none were voices that we
knew. One poor wretch, on the other hand, we heard plainly groaning to
his death; and we looked in each other's eyes with the same thought.

“That's Harris,” said I, with, I fear, but little compassion in my tone
or in my heart just then.

“Where are the others?” cried Eva piteously.

“God knows,” said I; “they may be done for, too.”

“If they are!”

“It's better than the death they would have lived to die.”

“But only one of them was a wilful murderer! Oh, Mr. Cole--Mr. Cole--go
and see what has happened; come back and tell me! I dare not come. I
will stay here and pray for strength to bear whatever news you may bring
me. Go quickly. I will--wait--and pray!”

So I left the poor child on her knees in that vile cellar, white face
and straining hands uplifted to the foul ceiling, sweet lips quivering
with prayer, eyelids reverently lowered, and the swift tears flowing
from beneath them, all in the yellow light of the lantern that stood
burning by her side. How different a picture from that which awaited me
overhead!




CHAPTER XIX. MY GREAT HOUR


The library doors were shut, and I closed the secret one behind me
before opening the other and peering out through a wrack of bluish
smoke; and there lay Captain Harris, sure enough, breathing his last in
the arms of one constable, while another was seated on the table with a
very wry face, twisting a tourniquet round his arm, from which the blood
was dripping like raindrops from the eaves. A third officer stood in the
porch, issuing directions to his men without.

“He's over the wall, I tell you! I saw him run up our ladder. After him
every man of you--and spread!”

I looked in vain for Rattray and the rest; yet it seemed as if only
one of them had escaped. I was still looking when the man in the porch
wheeled back into the hall, and instantly caught sight of me at my door.

“Hillo! here's another of them,” cried he. “Out you come, young fellow!
Your mates are all dead men.”

“They're not my mates.”

“Never mind; come you out and let's have a look at you.”

I did so, and was confronted by a short, thickset man, who recognized me
with a smile, but whom I failed to recognize.

“I might have guessed it was Mr. Cole,” said he. “I knew you were here
somewhere, but I couldn't make head or tail of you through the smoke.”

“I'm surprised that you can make head or tail of me at all,” said I.

“Then you've quite forgotten the inquisitive parson you met out fishing?
You see I found out your name for myself!”

“So it was a detective!”

“It was and is,” said the little man, nodding. “Detective or Inspector
Royds, if you're any the wiser.

“What has happened? Who has escaped?” “Your friend Rattray; but he won't
get far.”

“What of the Portuguese and the nigger?”

I forgot that I had crippled Jose, but remembered with my words, and
wondered the more where he was.

“I'll show you,” said Royds. “It was the nigger let us in. We heard him
groaning round at the back--who smashed his leg? One of our men was at
that cellar grating; there was some of them down there; we wanted to
find our way down and corner them, but the fat got in the fire too soon.
Can you stand something strong? Then come this way.”

He led me out into the garden, and to a tangled heap lying in the
moonlight, on the edge of the long grass. The slave had fallen on top
of his master; one leg lay swathed and twisted; one black hand had but
partially relaxed upon the haft of a knife (the knife) that stood up
hilt-deep in a blacker heart. And in the hand of Santos was still the
revolver (my Deane and Adams) which had sent its last ball through the
nigger's body.

“They slipped out behind us, all but the one inside,” said Royds,
ruefully; “I'm hanged if I know yet how it happened--but we were on them
next second. Before that the nigger had made us hide him in the grass,
but the old devil ran straight into him, and the one fired as the other
struck. It's the worst bit of luck in the whole business, and I'm rather
disappointed on the whole. I've been nursing the job all this week; had
my last look round this very evening, with one of these officers, and
only rode back for more to make sure of taking our gentlemen alive. And
we've lost three out of four of 'em, and have still to lay hands on
the gold! I suppose you didn't know there was any aboard?” he asked
abruptly.

“Not before to-night.”

“Nor did we till the Devoren came in with letters last week, a hundred
and thirty days out. She should have been in a month before you, but she
got amongst the ice around the Horn. There was a letter of advice about
the gold, saying it would probably go in the Lady Jermyn; and another
about Rattray and his schooner, which had just sailed; the young
gentleman was known to the police out there.”

“Do you know where the schooner is?”

“Bless you, no, we've had no time to think about her; the man had been
seen about town, and we've done well to lay hands on him in the time.”

“You will do better still when you do lay hands on him,” said I,
wresting my eyes from the yellow dead face of the foreign scoundrel.
The moon shone full upon his high forehead, his shrivelled lips, dank in
their death agony, and on the bauble with the sacred device that he wore
always in his tie. I recovered my property from the shrunken fingers,
and so turned away with a harder heart than I ever had before or since
for any creature of Almighty God.

Harris had expired in our absence.

“Never spoke, sir,” said the constable in whose arms we had left him.

“More's the pity. Well, cut out at the back and help land the young
gent, or we'll have him giving us the slip too. He may double back,
but I'm watching out for that. Which way should you say he'd head, Mr.
Cole?”

“Inland,” said I, lying on the spur of the moment, I knew not why. “Try
at the cottage where I've been staying.”

“We have a man posted there already. That woman is one of the gang,
and we've got her safe. But I'll take your advice, and have that side
scoured whilst I hang about the place.”

And he walked through the house, and out the back way, at the officer's
heels; meanwhile the man with the wounded arm was swaying where he sat
from loss of blood, and I had to help him into the open air before at
last I was free to return to poor Eva in her place of loathsome safety.

I had been so long, however, that her patience was exhausted, and as I
returned to the library by one door, she entered by the other.

“I could bear it no longer. Tell me--the worst!”

“Three of them are dead.”

“Which three?”

She had crossed to the other door, and would not have me shut it. So
I stood between her and the hearth, on which lay the captain's corpse,
with the hearthrug turned up on either side to cover it.

“Harris for one,” said I. “Outside lie Jose and--”

“Quick! Quick!”

“Senhor Santos.”

Her face was as though the name meant nothing to her.

“And Mr. Rattray?” she cried. “And Mr. Rattray--”

“Has escaped for the present. He seems to have cut his way through the
police and got over the wall by a ladder they left behind them. They are
scouring the country--Miss Denison! Eva! My poor love!”

She had broken down utterly in a second fit of violent weeping; and a
second time I took her in my arms, and stood trying in my clumsy way to
comfort her, as though she were a little child. A lamp was burning in
the library, and I recognized the arm-chair which Rattray had drawn
thence for me on the night of our dinner--the very night before! I led
Eva back into the room, and I closed both doors. I supported my poor
girl to the chair, and once more I knelt before her and took her hands
in mine. My great hour was come at last: surely a happy omen that it was
also the hour before the dawn.

“Cry your fill, my darling,” I whispered, with the tears in my own
voice. “You shall never have anything more to cry for in this world! God
has been very good to us. He brought you to me, and me to you. He has
rescued us for each other. All our troubles are over; cry your fill; you
will never have another chance so long as I live, if only you will let
me live for you. Will you, Eva? Will you? Will you?”

She drew her hands from mine, and sat upright in the chair, looking at
me with round eyes; but mine were dim; astonishment was all that I
could read in her look, and on I went headlong, with growing impetus and
passion.

“I know I am not much, my darling; but you know I was not always what my
luck, good and bad, has left me now, and you will make a new man of
me so soon! Besides, God must mean it, or He would not have thrown us
together amid such horrors, and brought us through them together still.
And you have no one else to take care of you in the world! Won't you let
me try, Eva? Say that you will!”

“Then--you--owe me?” she said slowly, in a low, awe-struck voice that
might have told me my fate at once; but I was shaking all over in the
intensity of my passion, and for the moment it was joy enough to be able
at last to tell her all.

“Love you?” I echoed. “With every fibre of my being! With every atom of
my heart and soul and body! I love you well enough to live to a hundred
for you, or to die for you to-night!”

“Well enough to--give me up?” she whispered.

I felt as though a cold hand had checked my heart at its hottest, but
I mastered myself sufficiently to face her question and to answer it as
honestly as I might.

“Yes!” I cried; “well enough even to do that, if it was for your
happiness; but I might be rather difficult to convince about that.”

“You are very strong and true,” she murmured. “Yes, I can trust you as
I have never trusted anybody else! But--how long have you been so
foolish?” And she tried very hard to smile.

“Since I first saw you; but I only knew it on the night of the fire.
Till that night I resisted it like an idiot. Do you remember how we used
to argue? I rebelled so against my love! I imagined that I had loved
once already and once for all. But on the night of the fire I knew that
my love for you was different from all that had gone before or would
ever come again. I gave in to it at last, and oh! the joy of giving in!
I had fought against the greatest blessing of my life, and I never knew
it till I had given up fighting. What did I care about the fire? I
was never happier--until now! You sang through my heart like the wind
through the rigging; my one fear was that I might go to the bottom
without telling you my love. When I asked to say a few last words to you
on the poop, it was to tell you my love before we parted, that you might
know I loved you whatever came. I didn't do so, because you seemed
so frightened, poor darling! I hadn't it in my heart to add to your
distress. So I left you without a word. But I fought the sea for days
together simply to tell you what I couldn't die without telling you.
When they picked me up, it was your name that brought back my senses
after days of delirium. When I heard that you were dead, I longed to
die myself. And when I found you lived after all, the horror of your
surroundings was nothing to be compared with the mere fact that you
lived; that you were unhappy and in danger was my only grief, but it was
nothing to the thought of your death; and that I had to wait twenty-four
hours without coming to you drove me nearer to madness than ever I was
on the hen-coop. That's how I love you, Eva,” I concluded; “that's how I
love and will love you, for ever and ever, no matter what happens.”

Those sweet gray eyes of hers had been fixed very steadily upon me all
through this outburst; as I finished they filled with tears, and my poor
love sat wringing her slender fingers, and upbraiding herself as though
she were the most heartless coquette in the country.

“How wicked I am!” she moaned. “How ungrateful I must be! You offer me
the unselfish love of a strong, brave man. I cannot take it. I have no
love to give you in return.”

“But some day you may,” I urged, quite happily in my ignorance. “It
will come. Oh, surely it will come, after all that we have gone through
together!”

She looked at me very steadily and kindly through her tears.

“It has come, in a way,” said she; “but it is not your way, Mr. Cole. I
do love you for your bravery and your--love--but that will not quite do
for either of us.”

“Why not?” I cried in an ecstasy. “My darling, it will do for me! It
is more than I dared to hope for; thank God, thank God, that you should
care for me at all!”

She shook her head.

“You do not understand,” she whispered.

“I do. I do. You do not love me as you want to love.”

“As I could love--”

“And as you will! It will come. It will come. I'll bother you no more
about it now. God knows I can afford to leave well alone! I am only too
happy--too thankful--as it is!”

And indeed I rose to my feet every whit as joyful as though she had
accepted me on the spot. At least she had not rejected me; nay, she
confessed to loving me in a way. What more could a lover want? Yet there
was a dejection in her drooping attitude which disconcerted me in the
hour of my reward. And her eyes followed me with a kind of stony remorse
which struck a chill to my bleeding heart.

I went to the door; the hall was still empty, and I shut it again with a
shudder at what I saw before the hearth, at all that I had forgotten
in the little library. As I turned, another door opened--the door made
invisible by the multitude of books around and upon it--and young Squire
Rattray stood between my love and me.

His clear, smooth skin was almost as pale as Eva's own, but pale brown,
the tint of rich ivory. His eyes were preternaturally bright. And they
never glanced my way, but flew straight to Eva, and rested on her very
humbly and sadly, as her two hands gripped the arms of the chair, and
she leant forward in horror and alarm.

“How could you come back?” she cried. “I was told you had escaped!”

“Yes, I got away on one of their horses.”

“I pictured you safe on board!”

“I very nearly was.”

“Then why are you here?”

“To get your forgiveness before I go.”

He took a step forward; her eyes and mine were riveted upon him; and I
still wonder which of us admired him the more, as he stood there in his
pride and his humility, gallant and young, and yet shamefaced and sad.

“You risk your life--for my forgiveness?” whispered Eva at last. “Risk
it? I'll give myself up if you'll take back some of the things you said
to me--last night--and before.”

There was a short pause.

“Well, you are not a coward, at all events!”

“Nor a murderer, Eva!”

“God forbid.”

“Then forgive me for everything else that I have been--to you!”

And he was on his knees where I had knelt scarce a minute before; nor
could I bear to watch them any longer. I believed that he loved her in
his own way as sincerely as I did in mine. I believed that she detested
him for the detestable crime in which he had been concerned. I believed
that the opinion of him which she had expressed to his face, in my
hearing, was her true opinion, and I longed to hear her mitigate it ever
so little before he went. He won my sympathy as a gallant who valued
a kind word from his mistress more than life itself. I hoped earnestly
that that kind word would be spoken. But I had no desire to wait to hear
it. I felt an intruder. I would leave them alone together for the last
time. So I walked to the door, but, seeing a key in it, I changed
my mind, and locked it on the inside. In the hall I might become the
unintentional instrument of the squire's capture, though, so far as my
ears served me, it was still empty as we had left it. I preferred to run
no risks, and would have a look at the subterranean passage instead.

“I advise you to speak low,” I said, “and not to be long. The place is
alive with the police. If they hear you all will be up.”

Whether he heard me I do not know. I left him on his knees still, and
Eva with her face hidden in her hands.

The cellar was a strange scene to revisit within an hour of my
deliverance from that very torture-chamber. It had been something more
before I left it, but in it I could think only of the first occupant of
the camp-stool. The lantern still burned upon the floor. There was the
mattress, still depressed where I had lain face to face with insolent
death. The bullet was in the plaster; it could not have missed by the
breadth of many hairs. In the corner was the shallow grave, dug by
Harris for my elements. And Harris was dead. And Santos was dead. But
life and love were mine.

I would have gone through it all again!

And all at once I was on fire to be back in the library; so much so,
that half a minute at the manhole, lantern in hand, was enough for me;
and a mere funnel of moist brown earth--a terribly low arch propped with
beams--as much as I myself ever saw of the subterranean conduit between
Kirby House and the sea. But I understood that the curious may traverse
it for themselves to this day on payment of a very modest fee.

As for me, I returned as I had come after (say) five minutes' absence;
my head full once more of Eva, and of impatient anxiety for the wild
young squire's final flight; and my heart still singing with the joy of
which my beloved's kindness seemed a sufficient warranty. Poor egotist!
Am I to tell you what I found when I came up those steep stairs to the
chamber where I had left him on his knees to her? Or can you guess?

He was on his knees no more, but he held her in his arms, and as I
entered he was kissing the tears from her wet, flushed cheek. Her
eyelids drooped; she was pale as the dead without, so pale that her
eyebrows looked abnormally and dreadfully dark. She did not cling to
him. Neither did she resist his caresses, but lay passive in his arms as
though her proper paradise was there. And neither heard me enter; it was
as though they had forgotten all the world but one another.

“So this is it,” said I very calmly. I can hear my voice as I write.

They fell apart on the instant. Rattray glared at me, yet I saw that his
eyes were dim. Eva clasped her hands before her, and looked me steadily
in the face. But never a word.

“You love him?” I said sternly.

The silence of consent remained unbroken.

“Villain as he is?” I burst out.

And at last Eva spoke.

“I loved him before he was one,” said she. “We were engaged.”

She looked at him standing by, his head bowed, his arms folded; next
moment she was very close to me, and fresh tears were in her eyes. But I
stepped backward, for I had had enough.

“Can you not forgive me?”

“Oh, dear, yes.”

“Can't you understand?”

“Perfectly,” said I.

“You know you said--”

“I have said so many things!”

“But this was that you--you loved me well enough to--give me up.”

And the silly ego in me--the endless and incorrigible I--imagined her
pouting for a withdrawal of those brave words.

“I not only said it,” I declared, “but I meant every word of it.”

None the less had I to turn from her to hide my anguish. I leaned my
elbows on the narrow stone chimney-piece, which, with the grate below
and a small mirror above, formed an almost solitary oasis in the four
walls of books. In the mirror I saw my face; it was wizened, drawn, old
before its time, and merely ugly in its sore distress, merely repulsive
in its bloody bandages. And in the mirror also I saw Rattray, handsome,
romantic, audacious, all that I was not, nor ever would be, and I
“understood” more than ever, and loathed my rival in my heart.

I wheeled round on Eva. I was not going to give her up--to him. I would
tell her so before him--tell him so to his face. But she had turned
away; she was listening to some one else. Her white forehead glistened.
There were voices in the hall.

“Mr. Cole! Mr. Cole! Where are you, Mr. Cole?”

I moved over to the locked door. My hand found the key. I turned round
with evil triumph in my heart, and God knows what upon my face. Rattray
did not move. With lifted hands the girl was merely begging him to go by
the door that was open, down the stair. He shook his head grimly. With
an oath I was upon them.

“Go, both of you!” I whispered hoarsely. “Now--while you can--and I can
let you. Now! Now!”

Still Rattray hung back.

I saw him glancing wistfully at my great revolver lying on the table
under the lamp. I thrust it upon him, and pushed him towards the door.

“You go first. She shall follow. You will not grudge me one last word?
Yes, I will take your hand. If you escape--be good to her!”

He was gone. Without, there was a voice still calling me; but now it
sounded overhead.

“Good-by, Eva,” I said. “You have not a moment to lose.”

Yet those divine eyes lingered on my ugliness.

“You are in a very great hurry,” said she, in the sharp little voice of
her bitter moments.

“You love him; that is enough.”

“And you, too!” she cried. “And you, too!”

And her pure, warm arms were round my neck; another instant, and she
would have kissed me, she! I know it. I knew it then. But it was more
than I would bear. As a brother! I had heard that tale before. Back I
stepped again, all the man in me rebelling.

“That's impossible,” said I rudely.

“It isn't. It's true. I do love you--for this!”

God knows how I looked!

“And I mayn't say good-by to you,” she whispered. “And--and I love
you--for that!”

“Then you had better choose between us,” said I.




CHAPTER XX. THE STATEMENT OF FRANCIS RATTRAY


In the year 1858 I received a bulky packet bearing the stamp of the
Argentine Republic, a realm in which, to the best of my belief, I had
not a solitary acquaintance. The superscription told me nothing. In
my relations with Rattray his handwriting had never come under my
observation. Judge then of my feelings when the first thing I read was
his signature at the foot of the last page.

For five years I had been uncertain whether he was alive or dead. I had
heard nothing of him from the night we parted in Kirby Hall. All I knew
was that he had escaped from England and the English police; his letter
gave no details of the incident. It was an astonishing letter; my breath
was taken on the first close page; at the foot of it the tears were in
my eyes. And all that part I must pass over without a word. I have never
shown it to man or woman. It is sacred between man and man.

But the letter possessed other points of interest--of almost universal
interest--to which no such scruples need apply; for it cleared up
certain features of the foregoing narrative which had long been
mysteries to all the world; and it gave me what I had tried in vain
to fathom all these years, some explanation, or rather history, of
the young Lancastrian's complicity with Joaquin Santos in the foul
enterprise of the Lady Jermyn. And these passages I shall reproduce word
for word; partly because of their intrinsic interest; partly for such
new light as they day throw on this or that phase of the foregoing
narrative; and, lastly, out of fairness to (I hope) the most gallant and
most generous youth who ever slipped upon the lower slopes of Avemus.

Wrote Rattray:

“You wondered how I could have thrown in my lot with such a man. You may
wonder still, for I never yet told living soul. I pretended I had joined
him of my own free will. That was not quite the case. The facts were as
follows:

“In my teens (as I think you know) I was at sea. I took my second mate's
certificate at twenty, and from that to twenty-four my voyages were far
between and on my own account. I had given way to our hereditary passion
for smuggling. I kept a 'yacht' in Morecambe Bay, and more French brandy
than I knew what to do with in my cellars. It was exciting for a time,
but the excitement did not last. In 1851 the gold fever broke out in
Australia. I shipped to Melbourne as third mate on a barque, and
I deserted for the diggings in the usual course. But I was never a
successful digger. I had little luck and less patience, and I have no
doubt that many a good haul has been taken out of claims previously
abandoned by me; for of one or two I had the mortification of hearing
while still in the Colony. I suppose I had not the temperament for the
work. Dust would not do for me--I must have nuggets. So from Bendigo I
drifted to the Ovens, and from the Ovens to Ballarat. But I did no more
good on one field than on another, and eventually, early in 1853, I cast
up in Melbourne again with the intention of shipping home in the first
vessel. But there were no crews for the homeward-bounders, and while
waiting for a ship my little stock of gold dust gave out. I became
destitute first--then desperate. Unluckily for me, the beginning of '53
was the hey-day of Captain Melville, the notorious bushranger. He was
a young fellow of my own age. I determined to imitate his exploits. I
could make nothing out there from an honest life; rather than starve
I would lead a dishonest one. I had been born with lawless tendencies;
from smuggling to bushranging was an easy transition, and about the
latter there seemed to be a gallantry and romantic swagger which put it
on the higher plane of the two. But I was not born to be a bushranger
either. I failed at the very first attempt. I was outwitted by my first
victim, a thin old gentleman riding a cob at night on the Geelong road.

“'Why rob me?' said he. 'I have only ten pounds in my pocket, and the
punishment will be the same as though it were ten thousand.'

“'I want your cob,' said I (for I was on foot); 'I'm a starving Jack,
and as I can't get a ship I'm going to take to the bush.'

“He shrugged his shoulders.

“'To starve there?' said he. 'My friend, it is a poor sport, this
bushranging. I have looked into the matter on my own account. You not
only die like a dog, but you live like one too. It is not worth while.
No crime is worth while under five figures, my friend. A starving Jack,
eh? Instead of robbing me of ten pounds, why not join me and take ten
thousand as your share of our first robbery? A sailor is the very man I
want!'

“I told him that what I wanted was his cob, and that it was no use his
trying to hoodwink me by pretending he was one of my sort, because I
knew very well that he was not; at which he shrugged again, and slowly
dismounted, after offering me his money, of which I took half. He shook
his head, telling me I was very foolish, and I was coolly mounting (for
he had never offered me the least resistance), with my pistols in my
belt, when suddenly I heard one cocked behind me.

“'Stop!' said he. 'It's my turn! Stop, or I shoot you dead!' The tables
were turned, and he had me at his mercy as completely as he had been at
mine. I made up my mind to being marched to the nearest police-station.
But nothing of the kind. I had misjudged my man as utterly as you
misjudged him a few months later aboard the Lady Jermyn. He took me
to his house on the outskirts of Melbourne, a weather-board bungalow,
scantily furnished, but comfortable enough. And there he seriously
repeated the proposal he had made me off-hand in the road. Only he put
it a little differently. Would I go to the hulks for attempting to rob
him of five pounds, or would I stay and help him commit a robbery, of
which my share alone would be ten or fifteen thousand? You know which
I chose. You know who this man was. I said I would join him. He made me
swear it. And then he told me what his enterprise was: there is no need
for me to tell you; nor indeed had it taken definite shape at this time.
Suffice it that Santos had wind that big consignments of Austrailian
gold were shortly to be shipped home to England; that he, like myself,
had done nothing on the diggings, where he had looked to make his
fortune, and out of which he meant to make it still.

“It was an extraordinary life that we led in the bungalow, I the guest,
he the host, and Eva the unsuspecting hostess and innocent daughter
of the house. Santos had failed on the fields, but he had succeeded in
making valuable friends in Melbourne. Men of position and of influence
spent their evenings on our veranda, among others the Melbourne agent
for the Lady Jermyn, the likeliest vessel then lying in the harbor, and
the one to which the first consignment of gold-dust would be entrusted
if only a skipper could be found to replace the deserter who took
you out. Santos made up his mind to find one. It took him weeks, but
eventually he found Captain Harris on Bendigo, and Captain Harris was
his man. More than that he was the man for the agent; and the Lady
Jermyn was once more made ready for sea.

“Now began the complications. Quite openly, Santos had bought the
schooner Spindrift, freighted her with wool, given me the command, and
vowed that he would go home in her rather than wait any longer for the
Lady Jermyn. At the last moment he appeared to change his mind, and I
sailed alone as many days as possible in advance of the ship, as had
been intended from the first; but it went sorely against the grain when
the time came. I would have given anything to have backed out of the
enterprise. Honest I might be no longer; I was honestly in love with Eva
Denison. Yet to have backed out would have been one way of losing her
for ever. Besides, it was not the first time I had run counter to the
law, I who came of a lawless stock; but it would be the first time I had
deserted a comrade or broken faith with one. I would do neither. In for
a penny, in for a pound.

“But before my God I never meant it to turn out as it did; though I
admit and have always admitted that my moral responsibility is but
little if any the less on that account. Yet I was never a consenting
party to wholesale murder, whatever else I was. The night before I
sailed, Santos and the captain were aboard with me till the small hours.
They promised me that every soul should have every chance; that nothing
but unforeseen accident could prevent the boats from making Ascension
again in a matter of hours; that as long as the gig was supposed to be
lost with all hands, nothing else mattered. So they promised, and that
Harris meant to keep his promise I fully believe. That was not a wanton
ruffian; but the other would spill blood like water, as I told you at
the hall, and as no man now knows better than yourself. He was notorious
even in Portuguese Africa on account of his atrocious treatment of the
blacks. It was a favorite boast of his that he once poisoned a whole
village; and that he himself tampered with the Lady Jermyn's boats you
can take my word, for I have heard him describe how he left it to the
last night, and struck the blows during the applause at the concert on
the quarter-deck. He said it might have come out about the gold in the
gig, during the fire. It was safer to run no risks.

“The same thing came into play aboard the schooner. Never shall I forget
the horror of that voyage after Santos came aboard! I had a crew of
eight hands all told, and two he brought with him in the gig. Of course
they began talking about the gold; they would have their share or split
when they got ashore; and there was mutiny in the air, with the steward
and the quarter-master of the Lady Jermyn for ring-leaders. Santos
nipped it in the bud with a vengeance! He and Harris shot every man
of them dead, and two who were shot through the heart they washed and
dressed and set adrift to rot in the gig with false papers! God knows
how we made Madeira; we painted the old name out and a new name in, on
the way; and we shipped a Portuguese crew, not a man of whom could speak
English. We shipped them aboard the Duque de Mondejo's yacht Braganza;
the schooner Spindrift had disappeared from the face of the waters for
ever. And with the men we took in plenty of sour claret and cigarettes;
and we paid them well; and the Portuguese sailor is not inquisitive
under such conditions.

“And now, honestly, I wished I had put a bullet through my head before
joining in this murderous conspiracy; but retreat was impossible, even
if I had been the man to draw back after going so far; and I had a still
stronger reason for standing by the others to the bitter end. I could
not leave our lady to these ruffians. On the other hand, neither could I
take her from them, for (as you know) she justly regarded me as the most
flagrant ruffian of them all. It was in me and through me that she was
deceived, insulted, humbled, and contaminated; that she should ever have
forgiven me for a moment is more than I can credit or fathom to this
hour... So there we were. She would not look at me. And I would not
leave her until death removed me. Santos had been kind enough to her
hitherto; he had been kind enough (I understand) to her mother before
her. It was only in the execution of his plans that he showed his
Napoleonic disregard for human life; and it was precisely herein that
I began to fear for the girl I still dared to love. She took up an
attitude as dangerous to her safety as to our own. She demanded to be
set free when we came to land. Her demand was refused. God forgive me,
it had no bitterer opponent than myself! And all we did was to harden
her resolution; that mere child threatened us to our faces, never shall
I forget the scene! You know her spirit: if we would not set her free,
she would tell all when we landed. And you remember how Santos used to
shrug? That was all he did then. It was enough for me who knew him. For
days I never left them alone together. Night after night I watched her
cabin door. And she hated me the more for never leaving her alone! I had
to resign myself to that.

“The night we anchored in Falmouth Bay, thinking then of taking our gold
straight to the Bank of England, as eccentric lucky diggers--that night
I thought would be the last for one or other of us. He locked her in
her cabin. He posted himself outside on the settee. I sat watching him
across the table. Each had a hand in his pocket, each had a pistol in
that hand, and there we sat, with our four eyes locked, while Harris
went ashore for papers. He came back in great excitement. What with
stopping at Madeira, and calms, and the very few knots we could knock
out of the schooner at the best of times, we had made a seven or eight
weeks' voyage of it from Ascension--where, by the way, I had arrived
only a couple of days before the Lady Jermyn, though I had nearly a
month's start of her. Well, Harris came back in the highest state of
excitement: and well he might: the papers were full of you, and of the
burning of the Lady Jermyn!

“Now mark what happened. You know, of course, as well as I do; but I
wonder if you can even yet realize what it was to us! Our prisoner
hears that you are alive, and she turns upon Santos and tells him he is
welcome to silence her, but it will do us ne good now, as you know that
the ship was wilfully burned, and with what object. It is the single
blow she can strike in self-defence; but a shrewder one could scarcely
be imagined. She had talked to you, at the very last; and by that time
she did know the truth. What more natural than that she should confide
it to you? She had had time to tell you enough to hang the lot of us;
and you may imagine our consternation on hearing that she had told you
all she knew! From the first we were never quite sure whether to believe
it or not. That the papers breathed no suspicion of foul play was
neither here nor there. Scotland Yard might have seen to that. Then
we read of the morbid reserve which was said to characterize all your
utterances concerning the Lady Jermyn. What were we to do? What we no
longer dared to do was to take our gold-dust straight to the Bank. What
we did, you know.

“We ran round to Morecambe Bay, and landed the gold as we Rattrays had
landed lace and brandy from time immemorial. We left Eva in charge of
Jane Braithwaite, God only knows how much against my will, but we were
in a corner, it was life or death with us, and to find out how much you
knew was a first plain necessity. And the means we took were the only
means in our power; nor shall I say more to you on that subject than I
said five years ago in my poor old house. That is still the one part of
the whole conspiracy of which I myself am most ashamed.

“And now it only remains for me to tell you why I have written all this
to you, at such great length, so long after the event. My wife wished
it. The fact is that she wants you to think better of me than I deserve;
and I--yes--I confess that I should like you not to think quite as ill
of me as you must have done all these years. I was villain enough, but
do not think I am unpunished.

“I am an outlaw from my country. I am morally a transported felon. Only
in this no-man's land am I a free man; let me but step across the border
and I am worth a little fortune to the man who takes me. And we have had
a hard time here, though not so hard as I deserved; and the hardest part
of all...”

But you must guess the hardest part: for the letter ended as it began,
with sudden talk of his inner life, and tentative inquiry after mine. In
its entirety, as I say, I have never shown it to a soul; there was just
a little more that I read to my wife (who could not hear enough about
his); then I folded up the letter, and even she has never seen the
passages to which I allude.

And yet I am not one of those who hold that the previous romances
of married people should be taboo between them in after life. On the
contrary, much mutual amusement, of an innocent character, may be
derived from a fair and free interchange upon the subject; and this is
why we, in our old age (or rather in mine), find a still unfailing topic
in the story of which Eva Denison was wayward heroine and Frank Rattray
the nearest approach to a hero. Sometimes these reminiscences lead to
an argument; for it has been the fate of my life to become attached to
argumentative persons. I suppose because I myself hate arguing. On
the day that I received Rattray's letter we had one of our warmest
discussions. I could repeat every word of it after forty years.

“A good man does not necessarily make a good husband,” I innocently
remarked.

“Why do you say that?” asked my wife, who never would let a
generalization pass unchallenged.

“I was thinking of Rattray,” said I. “The most tolerant of judges could
scarcely have described him as a good man five years ago. Yet I can see
that he has made an admirable husband. On the whole, and if you can't be
both, it is better to be the good husband!”

It was this point that we debated with so much ardor. My wife would take
the opposite side; that is her one grave fault. And I must introduce
personalities; that, of course, is among the least of mine. I compared
myself with Rattray, as a husband, and (with some sincerity) to my own
disparagement. I pointed out that he was an infinitely more fascinating
creature, which was no hard saying, for that epithet at least I have
never earned. And yet it was the word to sting my wife.

“Fascinating, perhaps!” said she. “Yes, that is the very word;
but--fascination is not love!”

And then I went to her, and stroked her hair (for she had hung her head
in deep distress), and kissed the tears from her eyes. And I swore that
her eyes were as lovely as Eva Denison's, that there seemed even more
gold in her glossy brown hair, that she was even younger to look at. And
at the last and craftiest compliment my own love looked at me through
her tears, as though some day or other she might forgive me.

“Then why did you want to give me up to him?” said she.


PREFACE

_The Lane Fleming collection of early pistols and revolvers was one of
the best in the country. When Fleming was found dead on the floor of
his locked gunroom, a Confederate-made Colt-type percussion .36 revolver
in his hand, the coroner's verdict was "death by accident." But Gladys
Fleming had her doubts. Enough at any rate to engage Colonel Jefferson
Davis Rand--better known just as Jeff--private detective and a
pistol-collector himself, to catalogue, appraise, and negotiate the
sale of her late husband's collection.

There were a number of people who had wanted the collection. The
question was: had anyone wanted it badly enough to kill Fleming? And if
so, how had he done it? Here is a mystery, told against the fascinating
background of old guns and gun-collecting, which is rapid-fire without
being hysterical, exciting without losing its contact with reason, and
which introduces a personable and intelligent new private detective. It
is a story that will keep your nerves on a hair trigger even if you don't
know the difference between a cased pair of Paterson .34's and a Texas
.40 with a ramming-lever._




CHAPTER 1


It was hard to judge Jeff Rand's age from his appearance; he was
certainly over thirty and considerably under fifty. He looked hard and
fit, like a man who could be a serviceable friend or a particularly
unpleasant enemy. Women instinctively suspected that he would make a
most satisfying lover. One might have taken him for a successful lawyer
(he had studied law, years ago), or a military officer in mufti (he still
had a Reserve colonelcy, and used the title occasionally, to impress
people who he thought needed impressing), or a prosperous businessman,
as he usually thought of himself. Most of all, he looked like King
Charles II of England anachronistically clad in a Brooks Brothers suit.

At the moment, he was looking rather like King Charles II being bothered
by one of his mistresses who wanted a peerage for her husband.

"But, Mrs. Fleming," he was expostulating. "There surely must be somebody
else.... After all, you'll have to admit that this isn't the sort of work
this agency handles."

The would-be client released a series of smoke-rings and watched them
float up toward the air-outlet at the office ceiling. It spoke well for
Rand's ability to subordinate esthetic to business considerations that he
was trying to give her a courteous and humane brush-off. She made even
the Petty and Varga girls seem credible. Her color-scheme was blue and
gold; blue eyes, and a blue tailored outfit that would have looked severe
on a less curvate figure, and a charmingly absurd little blue hat perched
on a mass of golden hair. If Rand had been Charles II, she could have
walked out of there with a duchess's coronet, and Nell Gwyn would have
been back selling oranges.

"Why isn't it?" she countered. "Your door's marked _Tri-State Detective
Agency, Jefferson Davis Rand, Investigation and Protection_. Well, I want
to know how much the collection's worth, and who'll pay the closest to
it. That's investigation, isn't it? And I want protection from being
swindled. And don't tell me you can't do it. You're a pistol-collector,
yourself; you have one of the best small collections in the state. And
you're a recognized authority on early pistols; I've read some of your
articles in the _Rifleman_. If you can't handle this, I don't know who
can."

Rand's frown deepened. He wondered how much Gladys Fleming knew about the
principles of General Semantics. Even if she didn't know anything, she
was still edging him into an untenable position. He hastily shifted from
the attempt to identify his business with the label, "private detective
agency."

"Well, here, Mrs. Fleming," he explained. "My business, including
armed-guard and protected-delivery service, and general investigation
and protection work, requires some personal supervision, but none of
it demands my exclusive attention. Now, if you wanted some routine
investigation made, I could turn it over to my staff, maybe put two or
three men to work on it. But there's nothing about this business of yours
that I could delegate to anybody; I'd have to do it all myself, at the
expense of neglecting the rest of my business. Now, I could do what you
want done, but it would cost you three or four times what you'd gain by
retaining me."

"Well, let me decide that, Colonel," she replied. "How much would you
have to have?"

"Well, this collection of your late husband's consists of some
twenty-five hundred pistols and revolvers, all types and periods," Rand
said. "You want me to catalogue it, appraise each item, issue lists, and
negotiate with prospective buyers. The cataloguing and appraisal alone
would take from a week to ten days, and it would be a couple more weeks
until a satisfactory sale could be arranged. Why, say five thousand
dollars; a thousand as a retainer and the rest on completion."

That, he thought, would settle that. He was expecting an indignant
outcry, and hardened his heart, like Pharaoh. Instead, Gladys Fleming
nodded equably.

"That seems reasonable enough, Colonel Rand, considering that you'd have
to be staying with us at Rosemont, away from your office," she agreed.
"I'll give you a check for the thousand now, with a letter of
authorization."

Rand nodded in return. Being thoroughly conscious of the fact that
he could only know a thin film of the events on the surface of any
situation, he was not easily surprised.

"Very well," he said. "You've hired an arms-expert. I'll be in Rosemont
some time tomorrow afternoon. Now, who are these prospective purchasers
you mentioned, and just how prospective, in terms of United States
currency, are they?"

"Well, for one, there's Arnold Rivers; he's offering ten thousand for the
collection. I suppose you know of him; he has an antique-arms business at
Rosemont."

"I've done some business with him," Rand admitted. "Who else?"

"There's a commission-dealer named Carl Gwinnett, who wants to handle
the collection for us, for twenty per cent. I'm told that that isn't an
unusually exorbitant commission, but I'm not exactly crazy about the
idea."

"You shouldn't be, if you want your money in a hurry," Rand told her.
"He'd take at least five years to get everything sold. He wouldn't dump
the whole collection on the market at once, upset prices, and spoil his
future business. You know, two thousand five hundred pistols of the sort
Mr. Fleming had, coming on the market in a lot, could do just that. The
old-arms market isn't so large that it couldn't be easily saturated."

"That's what I'd been thinking.... And then, there are some private
collectors, mostly friends of Lane's--Mr. Fleming's--who are talking
about forming a pool to buy the collection for distribution among
themselves," she continued.

"That's more like it," Rand approved. "If they can raise enough money
among them, that is. They won't want the stuff for resale, and they may
pay something resembling a decent price. Who are they?"

"Well, Stephen Gresham appears to be the leading spirit," she said. "The
corporation lawyer, you know. Then, there is a Mr. Trehearne, and a Mr.
MacBride, and Philip Cabot, and one or two others."

"I know Gresham and Cabot," Rand said. "They're both friends of mine, and
I have an account with Cabot, Joyner & Teale, Cabot's brokerage firm.
I've corresponded with MacBride; he specializes in Colts.... You're the
sole owner, I take it?"

"Well, no." She paused, picking her words carefully. "We may just run
into a little trouble, there. You see, the collection is part of the
residue of the estate, left equally to myself and my two stepdaughters,
Nelda Dunmore and Geraldine Varcek. You understand, Mr. Fleming and I
were married in 1941; his first wife died fifteen years before."

"Well, your stepdaughters, now; would they also be my clients?"

"Good Lord, no!" That amused her considerably more than it did Rand.
"Of course," she continued, "they're just as interested in selling the
collection for the best possible price, but beyond that, there may be a
slight divergence of opinion. For instance, Nelda's husband, Fred
Dunmore, has been insisting that we let him handle the sale of the
pistols, on the grounds that he is something he calls a businessman.
Nelda supports him in this. It was Fred who got this ten-thousand-dollar
offer from Rivers. Personally, I think Rivers is playing him for a
sucker. Outside his own line, Fred is an awful innocent, and I've never
trusted this man Rivers. Lane had some trouble with him, just before ..."

"Arnold Rivers," Rand said, when it was evident that she was not going
to continue, "has the reputation, among collectors, of being the biggest
crook in the old-gun racket, a reputation he seems determined to live
up--or down--to. But here; if your stepdaughters are co-owners, what's
my status? What authority, if any, have I to do any negotiating?"

Gladys Fleming laughed musically. "That, my dear Colonel, is where you
earn your fee," she told him. "Actually, it won't be as hard as it looks.
If Nelda gives you any argument, you can count on Geraldine to take your
side as a matter of principle; if Geraldine objects first, Nelda will
help you steam-roll her into line. Fred Dunmore is accustomed to dealing
with a lot of yes-men at the plant; you shouldn't have any trouble
shouting him down. Anton Varcek won't be interested, one way or another;
he has what amounts to a pathological phobia about firearms of any sort.
And Humphrey Goode, our attorney, who's executor of the estate, will
welcome you with open arms, once he finds out what you want to do. That
collection has him talking to himself, already. Look; if you come out
to our happy home in the early afternoon, before Fred and Anton get back
from the plant, we ought to ram through some sort of agreement with
Geraldine and Nelda."

"You and whoever else sides with me will be a majority," Rand considered.
"Of course, the other one may pull a Gromyko on us, but ... I think I'll
talk to Goode, first."

"Yes. That would be smart," Gladys Fleming agreed. "After all, he's
responsible for selling the collection." She crossed to the desk and sat
down in Rand's chair while she wrote out the check and a short letter of
authorization, then she returned to her own seat.

"There's another thing," she continued, lighting a fresh cigarette.
"Because of the manner of Mr. Fleming's death, the girls have a horror of
the collection almost--but not quite--as strong as their desire to get
the best possible price for it."

"Yes. I'd heard that Mr. Fleming had been killed in a firearms accident,
last November," Rand mentioned.

"It was with one of his collection-pieces," the widow replied. "One
he'd bought just that day; a Confederate-made Colt-type percussion .36
revolver. He'd brought it home with him, simply delighted with it, and
started cleaning it at once. He could hardly wait until dinner was over
to get back to work on it.

"We'd finished dinner about seven, or a little after. At about half-past,
Nelda went out somewhere in the coupé. Anton had gone up to his
laboratory, in the attic--he's one of these fortunates whose work is also
his hobby; he's a biochemist and dietitian--and Lane was in the gunroom,
on the second floor, working on his new revolver. Fred Dunmore was having
a bath, and Geraldine and I had taken our coffee into the east parlor.
Geraldine put on the radio, and we were listening to it.

"It must have been about 7:47 or 7:48, because the program had changed
and the first commercial was just over, when we heard a loud noise from
somewhere upstairs. Neither of us thought of a shot; my own first idea
was of a door slamming. Then, about five minutes later, we heard Anton,
in the upstairs hall, pounding on a door, and shouting: 'Lane! Lane! Are
you all right?' We ran up the front stairway, and found Anton, in his
rubber lab-apron, and Fred, in a bathrobe, and barefooted, standing
outside the gunroom door. The door was locked, and that in itself was
unusual; there's a Yale lock on it, but nobody ever used it.

"For a minute or so, we just stood there. Anton was explaining that he
had heard a shot and that nobody in the gunroom answered. Geraldine told
him, rather impatiently, to go down to the library and up the spiral. You
see," she explained, "the library is directly under the gunroom, and
there's a spiral stairway connecting the two rooms. So Anton went
downstairs and we stood waiting in the hall. Fred was shivering in his
bathrobe; he said he'd just jumped out of the bathtub, and he had
nothing on under it. After a while, Anton opened the gunroom door from
the inside, and stood in the doorway, blocking it. He said: 'You'd better
not come in. There's been an accident, but it's too late to do anything.
Lane's shot himself with one of those damned pistols; I always knew
something like this would happen.'

"Well, I simply elbowed him out of the way and went in, and the others
followed me. By this time, the uproar had penetrated to the rear of the
house, and the servants--Walters, the butler, and Mrs. Horder, the
cook--had joined us. We found Lane inside, lying on the floor, shot
through the forehead. Of course, he was dead. He'd been sitting on one of
these old cobblers' benches of the sort that used to be all the thing for
cocktail-tables; he had his tools and polish and oil and rags on it. He'd
fallen off it to one side and was lying beside it. He had a revolver in
his right hand, and an oily rag in his left."

"Was it the revolver he'd brought home with him?" Rand asked.

"I don't know," she replied. "He showed me this Confederate revolver when
he came home, but it was dirty and dusty, and I didn't touch it. And I
didn't look closely at the one he had in his hand when he was ... on the
floor. It was about the same size and design; that's all I could swear
to." She continued: "We had something of an argument about what to do.
Walters, the butler, offered to call the police. He's English, and his
mind seems to run naturally to due process of law. Fred and Anton both
howled that proposal down; they wanted no part of the police. At the
same time, Geraldine was going into hysterics, and I was trying to get
her quieted down. I took her to her room and gave her a couple of
sleeping-pills, and then went back to the gunroom. While I was gone, it
seems that Anton had called our family doctor, Dr. Yardman, and then Fred
called Humphrey Goode, our lawyer. Goode lives next door to us, about two
hundred yards away, so he arrived almost at once. When the doctor came,
he called the coroner, and when he arrived, about an hour later, they all
went into a huddle and decided that it was an obvious accident and that
no inquest would be necessary. Then somebody, I'm not sure who, called an
undertaker. It was past eleven when he arrived, and for once, Nelda got
home early. She was just coming in while they were carrying Lane out in a
basket. You can imagine how horrible that was for her; it was days before
she was over the shock. So she'll be just as glad as anybody to see the
last of the pistol-collection."

Through the recital, Rand had sat silently, toying with the ivory-handled
Italian Fascist dagger-of-honor that was doing duty as a letter-opener on
his desk. Gladys Fleming wasn't, he was sure, indulging in any
masochistic self-harrowing; neither, he thought, was she talking to
relieve her mind. Once or twice there had been a small catch in her
voice, but otherwise the narration had been a piece of straight
reporting, neither callous nor emotional. Good reporting, too; carefully
detailed. There had been one or two inclusions of inferential matter in
the guise of description, but that was to be looked for and discounted.
And she had remembered, at the end, to include her ostensible reason for
telling the story.

"Yes, it must have been dreadful," he sympathized. "Odd, though, that an
old hand with guns like Mr. Fleming would have an accident like that. I
met him, once or twice, and was at your home to see his collection, a
couple of years ago. He impressed me as knowing firearms pretty
thoroughly.... Well, you can look for me tomorrow, say around two. In
the meantime, I'll see Goode, and also Gresham and Arnold Rivers."




CHAPTER 2


After ushering his client out the hall door and closing it behind her,
Rand turned and said:

"All right, Kathie, or Dave; whoever's out there. Come on in."

Then he went to his desk and reached under it, snapping off a switch.
As he straightened, the door from the reception-office opened and
his secretary, Kathie O'Grady, entered, loading a cigarette into an
eight-inch amber holder. She was a handsome woman, built on the generous
lines of a Renaissance goddess; none of the Renaissance masters, however,
had ever employed a model so strikingly Hibernian. She had blue eyes, and
a fair, highly-colored complexion; she wore green, which went well with
her flaming red hair, and a good deal of gold costume-jewelry.

Behind her came Dave Ritter. He was Rand's assistant, and also Kathie's
lover. He was five or six years older than his employer, and slightly
built. His hair, fighting a stubborn rearguard action against baldness,
was an indeterminate mousy gray-brown. It was one of his professional
assets that nobody ever noticed him, not even in a crowd of one; when he
wanted it to, his thin face could assume the weary, baffled expression of
a middle-aged book-keeper with a wife and four children on fifty dollars
a week. Actually, he drew three times that much, had no wife, admitted to
no children. During the war, he and Kathie had kept the Tri-State Agency
in something better than a state of suspended animation while Rand had
been in the Army.

Ritter fumbled a Camel out of his shirt pocket and made a beeline for the
desk, appropriating Rand's lighter and sharing the flame with Kathie.

"You know, Jeff," he said, "one of the reasons why this agency never made
any money while you were away was that I never had the unadulterated
insolence to ask the kind of fees you do. I was listening in on the
extension in the file-room; I could hear Kathie damn near faint when
you said five grand."

"Yes; five thousand dollars for appraising a collection they've been
offered ten for, and she only has a third-interest," Kathie said,
retracting herself into the chair lately vacated by Gladys Fleming.
"If that makes sense, now ..."

"Ah, don't you get it, Kathleen Mavourneen?" Ritter asked. "She doesn't
care about the pistols; she wants Jeff to find out who fixed up that
accident for Fleming. You heard that big, long shaggy-dog story about
exactly what happened and where everybody was supposed to have been at
the time. I hope you got all that recorded; it was all told for a
purpose."

Rand had picked up the outside phone and was dialing. In a moment, a
girl's voice answered.

"Carter Tipton's law-office; good afternoon."

"Hello, Rheba; is Tip available?"

"Oh, hello, Jeff. Just a sec; I'll see." She buzzed another phone. "Jeff
Rand on the line," she announced.

A clear, slightly Harvard-accented male voice took over.

"Hello, Jeff. Now what sort of malfeasance have you committed?"

"Nothing, so far--cross my fingers," Rand replied. "I just want a little
information. Are you busy?... Okay, I'll be up directly."

He replaced the phone and turned to his disciples.

"Our client," he said, "wants two jobs done on one fee. Getting the
pistol-collection sold is one job. Exploring the whys and wherefores of
that quote accident unquote is the other. She has a hunch, and probably
nothing much better, that there's something sour about the accident. She
expects me to find evidence to that effect while I'm at Rosemont, going
over the collection. I'm not excluding other possibilities, but I'll work
on that line until and unless I find out differently. Five thousand
should cover both jobs."

"You think that's how it is?" Kathie asked.

"Look, Kathie. I got just as far in Arithmetic, at school, as you did,
and I suspect that Mrs. Fleming got at least as far as long division,
herself. For reasons I stated, I simply couldn't have handled that
collection business for anything like a reasonable fee, so I told her
five thousand, thinking that would stop her. When it didn't, I knew she
had something else in mind, and when she went into all that detail about
the death of her husband, she as good as told me that was what it was.
Now I'm sorry I didn't say ten thousand; I think she'd have bought it at
that price just as cheerfully. She thinks Lane Fleming was murdered.
Well, on the face of what she told me, so do I."

"All right, Professor; expound," Ritter said.

"You heard what he was supposed to have shot himself with," Rand began.
"A Colt-type percussion revolver. You know what they're like. And I know
enough about Lane Fleming to know how much experience he had with old
arms. I can't believe that he'd buy a pistol without carefully examining
it, and I can't believe that he'd bring that thing home and start working
on it without seeing the caps on the nipples and the charges in the
chambers, if it had been loaded. And if it had been, he would have first
taken off the caps, and then taken it apart and drawn the charges. And
she says he started working on it as soon as he got home--presumably
around five--and then took time out for dinner, and then went back to
work on it, and more than half an hour later, there was a shot and he was
killed." Rand blew a Bronx cheer. "If that accident had been the McCoy,
it would have happened in the first five minutes after he started working
on that pistol. No, in the first thirty seconds. And then, when they
found him, he had the revolver in his right hand, and an oily rag in his
left. I hope both of you noticed that little touch."

"Yeah. When I clean a gat, I generally have it in my left hand, and clean
with my right," Ritter said.

"Exactly. And why do you use an oily rag?" Rand inquired.

Ritter looked at him blankly for a half-second, then grinned ruefully.

"Damn, I never thought of that," he admitted. "Okay, he was bumped off,
all right."

"But you use oily rags on guns," Kathie objected. "I've seen both of you,
often enough."

"When we're all through, honey," Ritter told her.

"Yes. When he brought home that revolver, it was in neglected condition,"
Rand said. "Either surface-rusted, or filthy with gummed oil and dirt.
Even if Mrs. Fleming hadn't mentioned that point, the length of time he
spent cleaning it would justify such an inference. He would have taken it
apart, down to the smallest screw, and cleaned everything carefully, and
then put it together again, and then, when he had finished, he would have
gone over the surface with an oiled rag, before hanging it on the wall.
He would certainly not have surface-oiled it before removing the charges,
if there ever were any. I assume the revolver he was found holding,
presumably the one with which he was killed, was another one. And I would
further assume that the killer wasn't particularly familiar with the
subject of firearms, antique, care and maintenance of."

"And with all the hollering and whooping and hysterics-throwing, nobody
noticed the switch," Ritter finished. "Wonder what happened to the one he
was really cleaning."

"That I may possibly find out," Rand said. "The general incompetence with
which this murder was committed gives me plenty of room to hope that it
may still be lying around somewhere."

"Well, have you thought that it might just be suicide?" Kathie asked.

"I have, very briefly; I dismissed the thought, almost at once," Rand
told her. "For two reasons. One, that if it had been suicide, Mrs.
Fleming wouldn't want it poked into; she'd be more than willing to let it
ride as an accident. And, two, I doubt if a man who prided himself on his
gun-knowledge, as Fleming did, would want his self-shooting to be taken
for an accident. I'm damn sure I wouldn't want my friends to go around
saying: 'What a dope; didn't know it was loaded!' I doubt if he'd even
expect people to believe that it had been an accident." He shook his
head. "No, the only inference I can draw is that somebody murdered
Fleming, and then faked evidence intended to indicate an accident." He
rose. "I'll be back, in a little; think it over, while I'm gone."

       *       *       *       *       *

Carter Tipton had his law-office on the floor above the Tri-State
Detective Agency. He handled all Rand's not infrequent legal
involvements, and Rand did all his investigating and witness-chasing;
annually, they compared books to see who owed whom how much. Tipton was
about five years Rand's junior, and had been in the Navy during the war.
He was frequently described as New Belfast's leading younger attorney and
most eligible bachelor. His dark, conservatively cut clothes fitted him
as though they had been sprayed on, he wore gold-rimmed glasses, and he
was so freshly barbered, manicured, valeted and scrubbed as to give the
impression that he had been born in cellophane and just unwrapped. He
leaned back in his chair and waved his visitor to a seat.

"Tip, do you know anything about this Fleming family, out at Rosemont?"
Rand began, getting out his pipe and tobacco.

"The Premix-Foods Flemings?" Tipton asked. "Yes, a little. Which one of
them wants you to frame what on which other one?"

"That'll do for a good, simplified description, to start with," Rand
commented. "Why, my client is Mrs. Gladys Fleming. As to what she
wants...."

He told the young lawyer about his recent interview and subsequent
conclusions.

"So you see," he finished, "she won't commit herself, even with me. Maybe
she thinks I have more official status, and more obligations to the
police, than I have. Maybe she isn't sure in her own mind, and wants me
to see, independently, if there's any smell of something dead in the
woodpile. Or, she may think that having a private detective called in may
throw a scare into somebody. Or maybe she thinks somebody may be fixing
up an accident for her, next, and she wants a pistol-totin' gent in the
house for a while. Or any combination thereof. Personally, I deplore
these clients who hire you to do one thing and expect you to do another,
but with five grand for sweetening, I can take them."

"Yes. You know, I've heard rumors of suicide, but this is the first whiff
of murder I've caught." He hesitated slightly. "I must say, I'm not
greatly surprised. Lane Fleming's death was very convenient to a number
of people. You know about this Premix Company, don't you?"

"Vaguely. They manufacture ready-mixed pancake flour, and ready-mixed
ice-cream and pudding powders, and this dehydrated vegetable soup--pour
on hot water, stir, and serve--don't they? My colored boy, Buck, got some
of the soup, once, for an experiment. We unanimously voted not to try it
again."

"They put out quite a line of such godsends to the neophyte in the
kitchen, the popularity of which is reflected in a steadily rising
divorce-rate," Tipton said. "They advertise very extensively, including
half an hour of tear-jerking drama on a national hookup during soap-opera
time. Your client, the former Gladys Farrand, was on the air for Premix
for a couple of years; that's how Lane Fleming first met her."

"So you think some irate and dyspeptic husband went to the source of his
woes?" Rand inquired.

"Well, not exactly. You see, Premix is only Little Business, as the foods
industry goes, but they have something very sweet. So sweet, in fact,
that one of the really big fellows, National Milling & Packaging, has
been going to rather extreme lengths to effect a merger. Mill-Pack, par
100, is quoted at around 145, and Premix, par 50, is at 75 now, and
Mill-Pack is offering a two-for-one-share exchange, which would be a
little less than four-for-one in value. I might add, for what it's worth,
that this Stephen Gresham you mentioned is Mill-Pack's attorney,
negotiator, and general Mr. Fixit; he has been trying to put over
this merger for Mill-Pack."

"I'll bear that in mind, too," Rand said.

"Naturally, all this is not being shouted from the housetops," Tipton
continued. "Fact is, it's a minor infraction of ethics for me to mention
it to you."

"I'll file it in the burn-box," Rand promised. "What was the matter;
didn't Premix want to merge?"

"Lane Fleming didn't. And since he held fifty-two per cent of the common
stock himself, try and do anything about it."

"Anything short of retiring Fleming to the graveyard, that is," Rand
amended. "That would do for a murder-motive, very nicely.... What were
Fleming's objections to the merger?"

"Mainly sentimental. Premix was his baby, or, at least, his kid brother.
His father started mixing pancake flour back before the First World War,
and Lane Fleming peddled it off a spring wagon. They worked up a nice
little local trade, and finally a state-wide wholesale business. They
incorporated in the early twenties, and then, after the old man died,
Lane Fleming hired an advertising agency to promote his products, and
built up a national distribution, and took on some sidelines. Then,
during the late Mr. Chamberlain's 'Peace in our time,' he picked up a
refugee Czech chemist and foods-expert named Anton Varcek, who whipped
up a lot of new products. So business got better and better, and they
made more money to spend on advertising to get more money to buy more
advertising to make more money, like Bill Nye's Puritans digging clams
in the winter to get strength to hoe corn in the summer to get strength
to dig clams in the winter.

"So Premix became a sort of symbol of achievement to Fleming. Then, he
was one of these old-model paternalistic employers, and he was afraid
that if he relinquished control, a lot of his old retainers would be
turned out to grass. And finally, he was opposed in principle to
concentration of business ownership. He claimed it made business more
vulnerable to government control and eventual socialization."

"I'm not sure he didn't have something there," Rand considered. "We get
all our corporate eggs in a few baskets, and they're that much easier for
the planned-economy boys to grab.... Just who, on the Premix side, was in
favor of this merger?"

"Just about everybody but Fleming," Tipton replied. "His two sons-in-law,
Fred Dunmore and Varcek, who are first and second vice presidents.
Humphrey Goode, the company attorney, who doubles as board chairman.
All the directors. All the New York banking crowd who are interested
in Premix. And all the two-share tinymites. I don't know who inherits
Fleming's voting interest, but I can find out for you by this time
tomorrow."

"Do that, Tip, and bill me for what you think finding out is worth," Rand
said. "It'll be a novel reversal of order for you to be billing me for an
investigation.... Now, how about the family, as distinct from the
company?"

"Well, there's your client, Gladys Fleming. She married Lane Fleming
about ten years ago, when she was twenty-five and he was fifty-five. In
spite of the age difference, I understand it was a fairly happy marriage.
Then, there are two daughters by a previous marriage, Nelda Dunmore and
Geraldine Varcek, and their respective husbands. They all live together,
in a big house at Rosemont. In the company, Dunmore is Sales, and Varcek
is Production. They each have a corner of the mantle of Lane Fleming in
one hand and a dirk in the other. Nelda and Geraldine hate each other
like Greeks and Trojans. Nelda is the nymphomaniac sister, and Geraldine
is the dipsomaniac. From time to time, temporary alliances get formed,
mainly against Gladys; all of them resent the way she married herself
into a third-interest in the estate. You're going to have yourself a
nice, pleasant little stay in the country."

"I'm looking forward to it." Rand grimaced. "You mentioned suicide
rumors. Such as, and who's been spreading them?"

"Oh, they are the usual bodyless voices that float about," Tipton told
him. "Emanating, I suspect, from sources interested in shaking out the
less sophisticated small shareholders before the merger. The story is
always approximately the same: That Lane Fleming saw his company drifting
reefward, was unwilling to survive the shipwreck, and performed
_seppuku_. The family are supposed to have faked up the accident
afterward. I dismiss the whole thing as a rather less than subtle bit of
market-manipulation chicanery."

"Or a smoke screen, to cover the defects in camouflaging a murder as an
accident," Rand added.

Tipton nodded. "That could be so, too," he agreed. "Say somebody dislikes
the looks of that accident, and starts investigating. Then he runs into
all this miasma of suicide rumors, and promptly shrugs the whole thing
off. Fleming killed himself, and the family made a few alterations and
are passing it off as an accident. The families of suicides have been
known to do that."

"Yes. Regular defense-in-depth system; if the accident line is
penetrated, the suicide line is back of it," Rand said. "Well, in the
last few years, we've seen defenses in depth penetrated with monotonous
regularity. I've jeeped through a couple, myself, to interrogate the
surviving ex-defenders. It's all in having the guns and armor to smash
through with."




CHAPTER 3


Humphrey Goode was sixty-ish, short and chunky, with a fringe of
white hair around a bald crown. His brow was corrugated with wrinkles,
and he peered suspiciously at Rand through a pair of thick-lensed,
black-ribboned glasses. His wide mouth curved downward at the corners
in an expression that was probably intended to be stern and succeeded
only in being pompous. His office was dark, and smelled of dusty books.

"Mr. Rand," he began accusingly, "when your secretary called to make this
appointment, she informed me that you had been retained by Mrs. Gladys
Fleming."

"That's correct." Rand slowly packed tobacco into his pipe and lit it.
"Mrs. Fleming wants me to look after some interests of hers, and as
you're executor of her late husband's estate, I thought I ought to talk
to you, first of all."

Goode's eyes narrowed behind the thick glasses.

"Mr. Rand, if you're investigating the death of Lane Fleming, you're
wasting your time and Mrs. Fleming's money," he lectured. "There is
nothing whatever for you to find out that is not already public
knowledge. Mr. Fleming was accidentally killed by the discharge of an old
revolver he was cleaning. I don't know what foolish feminine impulse led
Mrs. Fleming to employ you, but you'll do nobody any good in this matter,
and you may do a great deal of harm."

"Did my secretary tell you I was making an investigation?" Rand demanded
incredulously. "She doesn't usually make mistakes of that sort."

The wrinkles moved up Goode's brow like a battalion advancing in platoon
front. He looked even more narrowly at Rand, his suspicion compounded
with bewilderment.

"Why should I investigate the death of Lane Fleming?" Rand continued.
"As far as I know, Mrs. Fleming is satisfied that it was an accident. She
never expressed any other belief to me. Do you think it was anything
else?"

"Why, of course not!" Goode exclaimed. "That's just what I was telling
you. I--" He took a fresh start. "There have been rumors--utterly without
foundation, of course--that Mr. Fleming committed suicide. They are, I
may say, nothing but malicious fabrications, circulated for the purpose
of undermining public confidence in Premix Foods, Incorporated. I had
thought that perhaps Mrs. Fleming might have heard them, and decided, on
her own responsibility, to bring you in to scotch them; I was afraid that
such a step might, by giving these rumors fresh currency, defeat its
intended purpose."

"Oh, nothing of the sort!" Rand told him. "I'm not in the least
interested in how Mr. Fleming was killed, and the question is simply
not involved in what Mrs. Fleming wants me to do."

He stopped there. Goode was looking at him sideways, sucking in one
corner of his mouth and pushing out the other. It was not a facial
contortion that impressed Rand favorably; it was too reminiscent of
a high-school principal under whom he had suffered, years ago, in
Vicksburg, Mississippi. Rand began to suspect that Goode might be just
another such self-righteous, opinionated, egotistical windbag. Such men
could be dangerous, were usually quite unscrupulous, and were almost
always unpleasant to deal with.

"Then why," the lawyer demanded, "did Mrs. Fleming employ you?"

"Well, as you know," Rand began, "the Fleming pistol-collection, now the
joint property of Mrs. Fleming and her two stepdaughters, is an extremely
valuable asset. Mr. Fleming spent the better part of his life gathering
it. At one time or another, he must have owned between four and five
thousand different pistols and revolvers. The twenty-five hundred left to
his heirs represent the result of a systematic policy of discriminating
purchase, replacement of inferior items, and general improvement. It's
one of the largest and most famous collections of its kind in the
country."

"Well?" Goode was completely out of his depth by now. "Surely Mrs.
Fleming doesn't think...?"

"Mrs. Fleming thinks that expert advice is urgently needed in disposing
of that collection," Rand replied, carefully picking his words to fit
what he estimated to be Goode's probable semantic reactions. "She has
the utmost confidence in your ability and integrity, as an attorney;
however, she realized that you could hardly describe yourself as an
antique-arms expert. It happens that I am an expert in antique firearms,
particularly pistols. I have a collection of my own, I am the author of
a number of articles on the subject, and I am recognized as something
of an authority. I know arms-values, and understand market conditions.
Furthermore, not being a dealer, or connected with any museum, I have no
mercenary motive for undervaluing the collection. That's all there is to
it; Mrs. Fleming has retained me as a firearms-expert, in connection with
the collection."

Goode was looking at Rand as though the latter had just torn off a mask,
revealing another and entirely different set of features underneath. The
change seemed to be a welcome one, but he was evidently having trouble
adjusting to it. Rand grinned inwardly; now he was going to have to find
himself a new set of verbal labels and identifications.

"Well, Mr. Rand, that alters the situation considerably," he said, with
noticeably less hostility. He was still a bit resentful; people had no
right to confuse him by jumping about from one category to another, like
that. "Now understand, I'm not trying to be offensive, but it seems a
little unusual for a private detective also to be an authority on antique
firearms."

"Mr. Fleming was an authority on antique firearms, and he was a
manufacturer of foodstuffs," Rand parried, carefully staying inside
Goode's Aristotelian system of categories and verbal identifications. "My
own business does not occupy all my time, any more than his did, and I
doubt if an interest in the history and development of deadly weapons is
any more incongruous in a criminologist than in an industrialist. But if
there's any doubt in your mind as to my qualifications, you can check
with Colonel Taylor, at the State Museum, or with the editor of the
_American Rifleman_."

"I see." Goode nodded. "And as you point out, being a sort of
non-professional expert, you should be free from mercenary bias." He
nodded again, taking off his glasses and polishing them on an outsize
white handkerchief. "Frankly, now that I understand your purpose, Mr.
Rand, I must say that I am quite glad that Mrs. Fleming took this step.
I was perplexed about how to deal with that collection. I realized that
it was worth a great deal of money, but I haven't the vaguest idea how
much, or how it could be sold to the best advantage.... At a rough guess,
Mr. Rand, how much do you think it ought to bring?"

Rand shook his head. "I only saw it twice, the last time two years ago.
Ask me that after I've spent a day or so going over it, and I'll be able
to give you an estimate. I will say this, though: It's probably worth a
lot more than the ten thousand dollars Arnold Rivers has offered for it."

That produced an unexpected effect. Goode straightened in his chair,
gobbling in surprised indignation.

"Arnold Rivers? Has he had the impudence to try to buy the collection?"
he demanded. "Where did you hear that?"

"From Mrs. Fleming. I understand he made the offer to Fred Dunmore.
That's his business, isn't it?"

"I believe the colloquial term is 'racket,'" Goode said. "Why, that man
is a notorious swindler! Mr. Rand, do you know that only a week before
his death, Mr. Fleming instructed me to bring suit against him, and also
to secure his indictment on criminal charges of fraud?"

"I didn't know that, but I'm not surprised," Rand answered. "What did he
burn Fleming with?"

"Here; I'll show you." Goode rose from his seat and went to a rank of
steel filing-cabinets behind the desk. In a moment, he was back, with a
large manila envelope under his arm, and a huge pistol in either hand.
"Here, Mr. Rand," he chuckled. "We'll just test your firearms knowledge.
What do you make of these?"

Rand took the pistols and looked at them. They were wheel locks,
apparently sixteenth-century South German; they were a good two feet in
over-all length, with ball-pommels the size of oranges, and long steel
belt-hooks. The stocks were so covered with ivory inlay that the wood
showed only in tiny interstices; the metal-work was lavishly engraved and
gold-inlaid. To the trigger-guards were attached tags marked _Fleming vs.
Rivers_.

Rand examined each pistol separately, then compared them. Finally, he
took a six-inch rule from his pocket and made measurements, first with
one edge and then with the other.

"Well, I'm damned," he said, laying them on the desk. "These things are
the most complete fakes I ever saw--locks, stocks, barrels and mountings.
They're supposed to be late sixteenth-century; I doubt if they were made
before 1920. As far as I can see or measure, there isn't the slightest
difference between them, except on some of the decorative inlay. The
whole job must have been miked in ten-thousandths, and what's more,
whoever made them used metric measurements. You'll find pairs of English
dueling pistols as early as 1775 that are almost indistinguishable, but
in 1575, when these things were supposed to have been made, a gunsmith
was working fine when he was working in sixteenth-inches. They just
didn't have the measuring instruments, at that time, to do closer work.
I won't bother taking these things apart, but if I did, I'd bet all
Wall Street to Junior's piggy-bank that I'd find that the screws were
machine-threaded and the working-parts interchanged. I've heard about
fakes like these,"--he named a famous, recently liquidated West Coast
collection--"but I'd never hoped to see an example like this."

Goode gave a hacking chuckle. "You'll do as an arms-expert, Mr. Rand," he
said. "And you'd win the piggy-bank. It seems that after Mr. Fleming
bought them, he took them apart, and found, just as you say, that the
screw-threads had been machine-cut, and that the working-parts were
interchangeable from one pistol to the other. There were a lot of papers
accompanying them--I have them here--purporting to show that they had
been sold by some Austrian nobleman, an anti-Nazi refugee, in whose
family they had been since the reign of Maximilian II. They are, of
course, fabrications. I looked up the family in the _Almanach de Gotha_;
it simply never existed. At first, Mr. Fleming had been inclined to take
the view that Rivers had been equally victimized with himself. However,
when Rivers refused to take back the pistols and refund the purchase
price, he altered his opinion. He placed them in my hands, instructing me
to bring suit and also start criminal action; he was in a fearful rage
about it, and swore that he'd drive Rivers out of business. However,
before I could start action, Mr. Fleming was killed in that accident, and
as he was the sole witness to the fact of the sale, and as none of the
heirs was interested, I did nothing about it. In fact, I advised them
that action against Rivers would cost the estate more than they could
hope to recover in damages." He picked up one of the pistols and examined
it. "Now, I don't know what to do about these."

"Take them home and hang them over the mantel," Rand advised. "If I'm
going to have anything to do with selling the collection, I don't want
anything to do with them."

Goode was peering at the ivory inlay on the underbelly of the stock.

"They are beautiful, and I don't care when they were made," he said. "I
think, if nobody else wants them, I'll do just that.... Now, Mr. Rand,
what had you intended doing about the collection?"

"Well, that's what I came to see you about, Mr. Goode. As I understand
it, it is you who are officially responsible for selling the collection,
and the proceeds would be turned over to you for distribution to Mrs.
Fleming, Mrs. Dunmore and Mrs. Varcek. Is that correct?"

"Yes. The collection, although in the physical possession of Mrs.
Fleming, is still an undistributed asset."

"I thought so." Rand got out Gladys Fleming's letter of authorization and
handed it to Goode. "As you'll see by that, I was retained by, and only
by, Mrs. Fleming," he said. "I am assuming that her interests are
identical with those of the other heirs, but I realize that this is true
only to a very limited extent. It's my understanding that relations
between the three ladies are not the most pleasant."

Goode produced a short, croaking laugh. "Now there's a cautious
understatement," he commented. "Mr. Rand, I feel that you should know
that all three hate each other poisonously."

"That was rather my impression. Now, I expect some trouble, from Mrs.
Dunmore and/or Mrs. Varcek, either or both of whom are sure to accuse me
of having been brought into this by Mrs. Fleming to help her defraud the
others. That, of course, is not the case; they will all profit equally by
my participation in this. But I'm going to have trouble convincing them
of that."

"Yes. You will," Goode agreed. "Would you rather carry my authorization
than Mrs. Fleming's?"

"Yes, indeed, Mr. Goode. To tell the truth, that was why I came here,
for one reason. You will not be obligated in any way by authorizing me
to act as your agent--I'm getting my fee from Mrs. Fleming--but I would
be obligated to represent her only as far as her interests did not
improperly conflict with those of the other heirs, and that's what I
want made clear."

Goode favored the detective with a saurian smile. "You're not a lawyer,
too, Mr. Rand?" he asked.

"Well, I am a member of the Bar in the State of Mississippi, though I
never practiced," Rand admitted. "Instead of opening a law-office, I went
into the F.B.I., in 1935, and then opened a private agency a couple of
years later. But if I had to, which God forbid, I could go home tomorrow
and hang out my shingle."

"You seem to have had quite an eventful career," Goode remarked, with a
queer combination of envy and disapproval. "I understand that, until
recently, you were an officer in the Army Intelligence, too.... I'll have
your authorization to act for me made out immediately; to list and
appraise the collection, and to negotiate with prospective purchasers.
And by the way," he continued, "did I understand you to say that you had
heard some of these silly rumors to the effect that Lane Fleming had
committed suicide?"

"Oh, that's what's always heard, under the circumstances," Rand shrugged.
"A certain type of sensation-loving mind..."

"Mr. Rand, there is not one scintilla of truth in any of these scurrilous
stories!" Goode declared, pumping up a fine show of indignation. "The
Premix Company is in the best possible financial condition; a glance at
its books, or at its last financial statement, would show that. I ought
to know, I'm chairman of the board of directors. Just because there was
some talk of retrenchment, shortly before Mr. Fleming's death ..."

"Oh, no responsible person pays any attention to that sort of talk," Rand
comforted him. "My armed-guard and armored-car service brings me into
contact with a lot of the local financial crowd. None of them is taking
these rumors seriously."

"Well, of course, nobody wants the responsibility of starting a panic,
even a minor one, but people are talking, and it's hurting Premix on the
market," Goode gloomed. "And now, people will hear of Mrs. Fleming's
having retained you, and will assume, just as I did at first, that you
are making some kind of an investigation. I hope you will make a prompt
denial, if you hear any talk like that." He pressed a button on his desk.
"And now, I'll get a letter of authorization made out for you, Mr.
Rand ..."




CHAPTER 4


Stephen Gresham was in his early sixties, but he could have still worn
his World War I uniform without anything giving at the seams, and buckled
the old Sam Browne at the same hole. As Rand entered, he rose from behind
his desk and advanced, smiling cordially.

"Why, hello, Jeff!" he greeted the detective, grasping his hand heartily.
"You haven't been around for months. What have you been doing, and why
don't you come out to Rosemont to see us? Dot and Irene were wondering
what had become of you."

"I'm afraid I've been neglecting too many of my old friends lately,"
Rand admitted, sitting down and getting his pipe out. "Been busy as the
devil. Fact is, it was business that finally brought me around here. I
understand that you and some others are forming a pool to buy the Lane
Fleming collection."

"Yes!" Gresham became enthusiastic. "Want in on it? I'm sure the others
would be glad to have you in with us. We're going to need all the money
we can scrape together, with this damned Rivers bidding against us."

"I'm afraid you will, at that, Stephen," Rand told him. "And not
necessarily on account of Rivers. You see, the Fleming estate has just
employed me to expertize the collection and handle the sale for them."
Rand got his pipe lit and drawing properly. "I hate doing this to you,
but you know how it is."

"Oh, of course. I should have known they'd get somebody like you in
to sell the collection for them. Humphrey Goode isn't competent to
handle that. What we were all afraid of was a public auction at some
sales-gallery."

Rand shook his head. "Worst thing they could do; a collection like
that would go for peanuts at auction. Remember the big sales in the
twenties?... Why, here; I'm going to be in Rosemont, staying at the
Fleming place, working on the collection, for the next week or so. I
suppose your crowd wouldn't want to make an offer until I have everything
listed, but I'd like to talk to your associates, in a group, as soon as
possible."

"Well, we all know pretty much what's in the collection," Gresham said.
"We were neighbors of his, and collectors are a gregarious lot. But we
aren't anxious to make any premature offers. We don't want to offer more
than we have to, and at the same time, we don't want to underbid and see
the collection sold elsewhere."

"No, of course not." Rand thought for a moment. "Tell you what; I'll give
you and your friends the best break I can in fairness to my clients. I'm
not obliged to call for sealed bids, or anything like that, so when I've
heard from everybody, I'll give you a chance to bid against the highest
offer in hand. If you want to top it, you can have the collection for any
kind of an overbid that doesn't look too suspiciously nominal."

"Why, Jeff, I appreciate that," Gresham said. "I think you're entirely
within your rights, but naturally, we won't mention this outside. I can
imagine Arnold Rivers, for instance, taking a very righteous view of such
an arrangement."

"Yes, so can I. Of course, if he'd call me a crook, I'd take that as
a compliment," Rand said. "I wonder if I could meet your group, say
tomorrow evening? I want to be in a position to assure the Fleming family
and Humphrey Goode that you're all serious and responsible."

"Well, we're very serious about it," Gresham replied, "and I think we're
all responsible. You can look us up, if you wish. Besides myself, there
is Philip Cabot, of Cabot, Joyner & Teale, whom you know, and Adam
Trehearne, who's worth about a half-million in industrial shares, and
Colin MacBride, who's vice president in charge of construction and
maintenance for Edison-Public Power & Light, at about twenty thousand a
year, and Pierre Jarrett and his fiancée, Karen Lawrence. Pierre was a
Marine captain, invalided home after being wounded on Peleliu; he writes
science-fiction for the pulps. Karen has a little general-antique
business in Rosemont. They intend using their share of the collection,
plus such culls and duplicates as the rest of us can consign to them, to
go into the arms business, with a general-antique sideline, which Karen
can manage while Pierre's writing.... Tell you what; I'll call a meeting
at my place tomorrow evening, say at eight thirty. That suit you?"

That, Rand agreed, would be all right. Gresham asked him how recently he
had seen the Fleming collection.

"About two years ago; right after I got back from Germany. You remember,
we went there together, one evening in March."

"Yes, that's right. We didn't have time to see everything," Gresham said.
"My God, Jeff! Twenty-five wheel locks! Ten snaphaunces. And every
imaginable kind of flintlock--over a hundred U.S. Martials, including the
1818 Springfield, all the S. North types, a couple of Virginia
Manufactory models, and--he got this since the last time you saw the
collection--a real Rappahannock Forge flintlock. And about a hundred and
fifty Colts, all models and most variants. Remember that big Whitneyville
Walker, in original condition? He got that one in 1924, at the Fred Hines
sale, at the old Walpole Galleries. And seven Paterson Colts, including
a couple of cased sets. And anything else you can think of. A Hall
flintlock breech-loader; an Elisha Collier flintlock revolver; a pair
of Forsythe detonator-lock pistols.... Oh, that's a collection to end
collections."

"By the way, Humphrey Goode showed me a pair of big ball-butt wheel
locks, all covered with ivory inlay," Rand mentioned.

Gresham laughed heartily. "Aren't they the damnedest ever seen, though?"
he asked. "Made in Germany, about 1870 or '80, about the time
arms-collecting was just getting out of the family-heirloom stage,
wouldn't you say?"

"I'd say made in Japan, about 1920," Rand replied. "Remember, there were
a couple of small human figures on each pistol, a knight and a huntsman?
Did you notice that they had slant eyes?" He stopped laughing, and looked
at Gresham seriously. "Just how much more of that sort of thing do you
think I'm going to have to weed out of the collection, before I can offer
it for sale?" he asked.

Gresham shook his head. "They're all. They were Lane Fleming's one false
step. Ordinarily, Lane was a careful buyer; he must have let himself get
hypnotized by all that ivory and gold, and all that documentation on
crested notepaper. You know, Fleming's death was an undeserved stroke of
luck for Arnold Rivers. If he hadn't been killed just when he was, he'd
have run Rivers out of the old-arms business."

"I notice that Rivers isn't advertising in the _American Rifleman_ any
more," Rand observed.

"No; the National Rifle Association stopped his ad, and lifted his
membership card for good measure," Gresham said. "Rivers sold a rifle to
a collector down in Virginia, about three years ago, while you were still
occupying Germany. A fine, early flintlock Kentuck, that had been made
out of a fine, late percussion Kentuck by sawing off the breech-end of
the barrel, rethreading it for the breech-plug, drilling a new vent, and
fitting the lock with a flint hammer and a pan-and-frizzen assembly, and
shortening the fore-end to fit. Rivers has a gunsmith over at Kingsville,
one Elmer Umholtz, who does all his fraudulent conversions for him. I
have an example of Umholtz's craftsmanship, myself. The collector who
bought this spurious flintlock spotted what had been done, and squawked
to the Rifle Association, and to the postal authorities."

"Rivers claimed, I suppose, that he had gotten it from a family that had
owned it ever since it was made, and showed letters signed 'D. Boone' and
'Davy Crockett' to prove it?"

"No, he claimed to have gotten it in trade from some wayfaring
collector," Gresham replied. "He convinced Uncle Whiskers, but the
N.R.A. took a slightly dimmer view of the transaction, so Rivers doesn't
advertise in the _Rifleman_ any more."

"Wasn't there some talk about Whitneyville Walker Colts that had been
made out of 1848 Model Colt Dragoons?" Rand asked.

"Oh Lord, yes! This fellow Umholtz was practically turning them out on
an assembly-line, for a while. Rivers must have sold about ten of them.
You know, Umholtz is a really fine gunsmith; I had him build a deer-rifle
for Dot, a couple of years ago--Mexican-Mauser action, Johnson
barrel, chambered for .300 Savage; Umholtz made the stock and fitted a
scope-sight--it's a beautiful little rifle. I hate to see him prostitute
his talents the way he does by making these fake antiques for Rivers. You
know, he made one of these mythical heavy .44 six-shooters of the sort
Colt was supposed to have turned out at Paterson in 1839 for Colonel
Walker's Texas Rangers--you know, the model he couldn't find any of in
1847, when he made the real Walker Colt. That story you find in Sawyer's
book."

"Why, that story's been absolutely disproved," Rand said. "There never
was any such revolver."

"Not till Umholtz made one," Gresham replied. "Rivers sold it to,"--he
named a moving-picture bigshot--"for twenty-five hundred dollars. His
story was that he picked it up in Mexico, in 1938; traded a .38-special
to some halfbreed goat-herder for it."

"This fellow who bought it, now; did he see Belden and Haven's Colt book,
when it came out in 1940?"

"Yes, and he was plenty burned up, but what could he do? Rivers was dug
in behind this innocent-purchase-and-sale-in-good-faith Maginot Line of
his. You know, that bastard took me, once, just one-tenth as badly, with
a fake U.S. North & Cheney Navy flintlock 1799 Model that had been made
out of a French 1777 Model." The lawyer muttered obscenely.

"Why didn't you sue hell out of him?" Rand asked. "You might not have
gotten anything, but you'd have given him a lot of dirty publicity.
That's all Fleming was expecting to do about those wheel locks."

"I'm not Fleming. He could afford litigation like that; I can't. I want
my money, and if I don't get it in cash, I'm going to beat it out of that
dirty little swindler's hide," Gresham replied, an ugly look appearing on
his face.

"I wouldn't blame you. You could find plenty of other collectors who'd
hold your coat while you were doing it," Rand told him. Then he inquired,
idly: "What sort of a pistol was it that Lane Fleming is supposed to have
shot himself with?"

Gresham frowned. "I really don't know; I didn't see it. It's supposed
to have been a Confederate Leech & Rigdon .36; you know, one of those
imitation Colt Navy Models that were made in the South during the Civil
War."

Rand nodded. He was familiar with the type.

"The story is that Fleming found it hanging back of the counter at some
roadside lunch-stand, along with a lot of other old pistols, and talked
the proprietor into letting it go for a few dollars," Gresham continued.
"It was supposed to have been loaded at the time, and went off while
Fleming was working on it, at home." He shook his head. "I can't believe
that, Jeff. Lane Fleming would know a loaded revolver when he saw one. I
believe he deliberately shot himself, and the family faked the accident
and fixed the authorities. The police never made any investigation; it
was handled by the coroner alone. And our coroner, out in Scott County,
is eminently fixable, if you go about it right; a pitiful little
nonentity with a tremendous inferiority complex."

"But good Lord, why?" Rand demanded. "I never heard of Fleming having any
troubles worth killing himself over."

Gresham lowered his voice. "Jeff, I'm not supposed to talk about this,
but the fact is that I believe Fleming was about to lose control of the
Premix Company," he said. "I have, well, sources of inside information.
This is in confidence, so don't quote me, but certain influences were at
work, inside the company, toward that end." He inspected the tip of his
cigar and knocked off the ash into the tray at his elbow. "Lane Fleming's
death is on record as accidental, Jeff. It's been written off as such. It
would be a great deal better for all concerned if it were left at that."




CHAPTER 5


Rand drove slowly through Rosemont, the next day, refreshing his memory
of the place. It was one of the many commuters' villages strung out for
fifty miles along the railroad lines radiating from New Belfast, and
depended for its support upon a population scattered over a five-mile
radius at estates and country homes. Obviously a planned community, it
was dominated by a gray-walled, green-roofed railroad station which stood
on its passenger-platform like a captain in front of four platoons of
gray-walled, green-roofed houses and stores aligned along as many
converging roads. There was a post office, uniform with the rest of the
buildings; an excessive quantity of aluminum trimming dated it somewhere
in the middle Andrew W. Mellon period. There were four gas stations, a
movie theater, and a Woolworth store with a red front that made it look
like some painted hussy who had wandered into a Quaker Meeting.

Over the door of one of the smaller stores, Rand saw a black-lettered
white sign: _Antiques_. There was a smoke-gray Plymouth coupé parked in
front of it.

Instead of turning onto the road to the Fleming estate, he continued
along Route 19 for a mile or so beyond the village, until he came to a
red brick pseudo-Colonial house on the right. He pulled to the side of
the road and got out, turning up the collar of his trench coat. The air
was raw and damp, doubly unpleasant after the recent unseasonable warmth.
An apathetically persistent rain sogged the seedling-dotted old fields on
either side, and the pine-woods beyond, and a high ceiling of unbroken
dirty gray gave no promise of clearing. The mournful hoot of a distant
locomotive whistle was the only sound to pierce the silence. For a
moment, Rand stood with his back to the car, looking at the gallows-like
sign that proclaimed this to be the business-place of Arnold Rivers,
Fine Antique and Modern Firearms for the Discriminating Collector.

The house faced the road with a long side; at the left, a porch formed
a continuation under a deck roof, and on the right, an ell had been
built at right angles, extending thirty feet toward the road. Although
connected to the house by a shed roof, which acquired a double pitch and
became a gable roof where the ell projected forward, it was, in effect,
a separate building, with its own front door and its own door-path. Its
floor-level was about four feet lower than that of the parent structure.

A Fibber McGee door-chime clanged as Rand entered. Closing the door
behind him, he looked around. The room, some twenty feet wide and fifty
long, was lighted by an almost continuous row of casement windows on the
right, and another on the left for as far as the ell extended beyond the
house. They were set high, a good five feet from lower sill to floor, and
there was no ceiling; the sloping roof was supported by bare timber
rafters. Racks lined the walls, under the windows, holding long-guns
and swords; the pistols and daggers and other small items were displayed
on a number of long tables. In the middle of the room, glaring at the
front door, was a brass four-pounder on a ship's carriage; a Philippine
_latanka_, muzzle tilted upward, stood beside it. Where the ell joined
the house under the shed roof, there was a fireplace, and a short flight
of steps to a landing and a door out of the dwelling, and some
furniture--a davenport, three or four deep chairs facing the fire, a low
cocktail-table, a cellarette, and, in the far corner, a big desk.

As Rand went toward the rear, a young man rose from one of the chairs,
laid aside a magazine, and advanced to meet him. He didn't exactly
harmonize with all the lethal array around him; he would have looked more
at home presiding over an establishment devoted to ladies' items. His
costume ran to pastel shades, he had large and soulful blue eyes and
prettily dimpled cheeks, and his longish blond hair was carefully
disordered into a windblown effect.

"Oh, good afternoon," he greeted. "Is there anything in particular you're
interested in, or would you like to just look about?"

"Mostly look about," Rand said. "Is Mr. Rivers in?"

"Mr. Rivers is having luncheon. He'll be finished before long, if you
care to wait.... Have you ever been here before?"

"Not for some time," Rand said. "When I was here last, there was a young
fellow named Jordan, or Gordon, or something like that."

"Oh. He was before my time." The present functionary introduced himself
as Cecil Gillis. Rand gave his name and shook hands with him. Young
Gillis wanted to know if Rand was a collector.

"In a small way. General-pistol collector," Rand told him. "Have you many
Colts, now?"

There was a whole table devoted to Colts. No spurious Whitneyville
Walkers; after all, a dealer can sell just so many of such top-drawer
rarities before the finger of suspicion begins leveling itself in his
direction, and Arnold Rivers had long ago passed that point. There were
several of the commoner percussion models, however, with lovely, perfect
bluing that was considerably darker than that applied at the Colt factory
during the 'fifties and 'sixties of the last century. The silver plating
on backstraps and trigger-guards was perfect, too, but the naval-battle
and stagecoach-holdup engravings on the cylinders were far from clear--in
one case, completely obliterated. The cylinder of one 1851 Navy bore
serial numbers that looked as though they had been altered to conform to
the numbers on other parts of the weapon. Many of the Colts, however,
were entirely correct, and all were in reasonably good condition.

Rand saw something that interested him, and picked it up.

"That isn't a real Colt," the exquisite Mr. Gillis told him. "It's a
Confederate copy; a Leech & Rigdon."

"So I see. I have a Griswold & Grier, but no Leech & Rigdon."

"The Griswold & Grier; that's the one with the brass frame," Cecil Gillis
said. "Surprising how many collectors think all Confederate revolvers
had brass frames, because of the Griswold & Grier, and the Spiller &
Burr.... That's an unusually fine specimen, Mr. Rand. Mr. Rivers got
it sometime in late December or early January; from a gentleman in
Charleston, I understand. I believe it had been carried during the Civil
War by a member of the former owner's family."

Rand looked at the tag tied to the trigger-guard; it was marked, in
letter-code, with three different prices. That was characteristic of
Arnold Rivers's business methods.

"How much does Mr. Rivers want for this?" he asked, handing the revolver
to young Gillis.

The clerk mentally decoded the three prices and vacillated for a moment
over them. He had already appraised Rand, from his twenty-dollar Stetson
past his Burberry trench coat to his English hand-sewn shoes, and placed
him in the pay-dirt bracket; however, from some remarks Rand had let
drop, he decided that this customer knew pistols, and probably knew
values.

"Why, that is sixty dollars, Mr. Rand," he said, with the air of one
conferring a benefaction. Maybe he was, at that, Rand decided; prices had
jumped like the very devil since the war.

"I'll take it." He dug out his billfold and extracted three twenties.
"Nice clean condition; clean it up yourself?"

"Why, no. Mr. Rivers got it like this. As I said, it's supposed to have
been a family heirloom, but from the way it's been cared for, I would
have thought it had been in a collection," the clerk replied. "Shall I
wrap it for you?"

"Yes, if you please." Rand followed him to the rear, laying aside his
coat and hat. Gillis got some heavy paper out of a closet and packaged
it, then hunted through a card-file in the top drawer of the desk, until
he found the card he wanted. He made a few notes on it, and was still
holding it and the sixty dollars when he rejoined Rand by the fire.

In spite of his effeminate appearance and over-refined manner, the young
fellow really knew arms. The conversation passed from Confederate
revolvers to the arms of the Civil War in general, and they were
discussing the changes in tactics occasioned by the introduction of the
revolver and the repeating carbine when the door from the house opened
and Arnold Rivers appeared on the landing.

He looked older than when Rand had last seen him. His hair was thinner on
top and grayer at the temples. Never particularly robust, he had lost
weight, and his face was thinner and more hollow-cheeked. His mouth still
had the old curve of supercilious insolence, and he was still smoking
with the six-inch carved ivory cigarette-holder which Rand remembered.

He looked his visitor over carefully from the doorway, decided that he
was not soliciting magazine subscriptions or selling Fuller brushes, and
came down the steps. As he did, he must have recognized Rand; he shifted
the cigarette-holder to his left hand and extended his right.

"Mr. Rand, isn't it?" he asked. "I thought I knew you. It's been some
years since you've been around here."

"I've been a lot of places in the meantime," Rand said.

"You were here last in October, '41, weren't you?" Rivers thought for a
moment. "You bought a Highlander, then. By Alexander Murdoch, of Doune,
wasn't it?"

"No; Andrew Strahan, of Edzel," Rand replied.

Rivers snapped his fingers. "That's right! I sold both of those pistols
at about the same time; a gentleman in Chicago got the Murdoch. The
Strahan had a star-pierced lobe on the hammer. Did you ever get anybody
to translate the Gaelic inscription on the barrel?"

"You've a memory like Jim Farley," Rand flattered. "The inscription was
the clan slogan of the Camerons; something like: _Sons of the hound, come
and get flesh!_ I won't attempt the original."

"Mr. Rand just bought 6524, the Leech & Rigdon .36," Gillis interjected,
handing Rivers the card and the money. Rivers looked at both, saw how
much Rand had been taken for, and nodded.

"A nice item," he faintly praised, as though anything selling for less
than a hundred dollars was so much garbage. "Considering the condition in
which Confederate arms are usually found, it's really first-rate. I think
you'll like it, Mr. Rand."

The telephone rang, Cecil Gillis answered it, listened for a moment, and
then said: "For you, Mr. Rivers; long distance from Milwaukee."

Rivers's face lit with the beatific smile of a cat at a promising
mouse-hole. "Ah, excuse me, Mr. Rand." He crossed to the desk, picked
up the phone and spoke into it. "This is Arnold Rivers," he said, much
as Edward Murrow used to say, _This--is London!_ The telephone sputtered
for a moment. "Ah, yes indeed, Mr. Verral. Quite well, I thank you. And
you?... No, it hasn't been sold yet. Do you wish me to ship it to
you?... On approval; certainly.... Of course it's an original flintlock;
I didn't list it as re-altered, did I?... No, not at all; the only
replacement is the small spring inside the patchbox.... Yes, the rifling
is excellent.... Of course; I'll ship it at once.... Good-by, Mr.
Verral."

He hung up and turned to his hireling, fairly licking his chops.

"Cecil, Mr. Verral, in Milwaukee, whose address we have, has just ordered
6288, the F. Zorger flintlock Kentuck. Will you please attend to it?"

"Right away, Mr. Rivers." Gillis went to one of the racks under the
windows and selected a long flintlock rifle, carrying it out the door at
the rear.

"I issued a list, a few days ago," Rivers told Rand. "When Cecil comes
back, I'll have him get you a copy. I've been receiving calls ever since;
this is the twelfth long-distance call since Tuesday."

"Business must be good," Rand commented. "I understand you've offered to
buy the Lane Fleming collection. For ten thousand dollars."

"Where did you hear that?" Rivers demanded, looking up from the drawer in
which he was filing the card on the Leech & Rigdon.

"From Mrs. Fleming." Rand released a puff of pipe smoke and watched it
draw downward into the fireplace. "I've been retained to handle the sale
of that collection; naturally, I'd know who was offering how much."

Rivers's eyes narrowed. He came around the desk, loading another
cigarette into his holder.

"And just why, might I ask, did Mrs. Fleming think it in order to employ
a detective in a matter like that?" he wanted to know.

Rand let out more smoke. "She didn't. She employed an arms-expert, a
Colonel Jefferson Davis Rand, U.S.A., O.R.C., who is a well-known
contributor to the _American Rifleman_ and the _Infantry Journal_ and
_Antiques_ and the old _Gun Report_. You've read some of his articles,
I believe?"

"Then you're not making an investigation?"

"What in the world is there to investigate?" Rand asked. "I'm just
selling a lot of old pistols for the Fleming estate."

"I thought Fred Dunmore was doing that."

"So did Fred. You're both wrong, though. I am." He got out Goode's letter
of authorization and handed it to Rivers, who read it through twice
before handing it back. "You see anything in that about Fred Dunmore,
or any of the other relatives-in-law?" he asked.

"Well, I didn't understand; I'm glad to know what the situation really
is." Rivers frowned. "I thought you were making some kind of an
investigation, and as I'm the only party making any serious offer to buy
those pistols, I wanted to know what there was to investigate."

"Do you consider ten thousand dollars to be a serious offer?" Rand asked.
"And aren't you forgetting Stephen Gresham and his friends?"

"Oh, those people!" Rivers scoffed. "Mr. Rand, you certainly don't expect
them to be able to handle anything like this, do you?"

"Well, the banks speak well of them," Rand replied. "Some of them have
good listings in Dun & Bradstreet's, too."

"Well, so do I," Rivers reported. "I can top any offer that crowd makes.
What do you expect to get out of them, anyhow?"

"I haven't talked price with them, yet. A lot more than ten thousand
dollars, anyhow."

Rivers forced a laugh. "Now, Mr. Rand! That was just an opening offer. I
thought Fred Dunmore was handling the collection." He grimaced. "What do
you think it's really worth?"

Rand shrugged. "It probably has a dealer's piece-by-piece list-value
of around seventy thousand. I'm not nuts enough to expect anything like
that in a lump sum, but please, let's not mention ten thousand dollars in
this connection any more. That's on the order of Lawyer Marks bidding
seventy-five cents for Uncle Tom; it's only good for laughs."

"Well, how much more than that do you think Gresham and his crowd will
offer?"

"I haven't talked price with them, yet," Rand repeated. "I mean to, as
soon as I can."

"Well, you get their offer, and I'll top it," Rivers declared. "I'm
willing to go as high as twenty-five thousand for that collection; they
won't go that high."

Although he just managed not to show it, Rand was really surprised. Even
a consciousness of abstracting had not prepared him for the shock of
hearing Arnold Rivers raise his own offer to something resembling an
acceptable figure. A good case, he reflected, could be made of that
for the actuality of miracles.

He rose, picking up his trench coat.

"Well! That's something like it, now," he said. "I'll see you later; I
don't know how long it's going to take me to get a list prepared, and
circularize the old-arms trade. I should hear from everybody who's
interested in a few weeks. You can be sure I'll keep your offer in mind."

He slipped into the coat and put on his hat, and then picked up the
package containing the Confederate revolver. Rivers had risen, too; he
was watching Rand nervously. When Rand tucked the package under his arm
and began drawing on his gloves, Rivers cleared his throat.

"Mr. Rand, I'm dreadfully sorry," he began, "but I'll have to return your
money and take back that revolver. It should not have been sold." He got
Rand's sixty dollars out of his pocket as though he expected it to catch
fire, and held it out.

Rand favored him with a display of pained surprise.

"Why, I can't do that," he replied. "I bought this revolver in good
faith, and you accepted payment and were satisfied with the transaction.
The sale's been made, now."

Rivers seemed distressed. It was probably the first time he had ever been
on the receiving end of that routine, and he didn't like it.

"Now you're being unreasonable, Mr. Rand," he protested. "Look here; I'll
give you seventy-five dollars' credit on anything else in the shop. You
certainly can't find fault with an offer like that."

"I don't want anything else in the shop; I want this revolver you sold
me." Rand gave him a look of supercilious insolence that was at least a
two hundred per cent improvement on Rivers at his most insolent. "You
know, I'll begin to acquire a poor idea of your business methods before
long," he added.

Rivers laughed ruefully. "Well, to tell the truth, I just remembered a
customer of mine who specializes in Confederate arms, who would pay me at
least eighty for that item," he admitted. "I thought..."

Rand shook his head. "I have a special fondness for Confederate arms,
myself. One of my grandfathers was in Mosby's Rangers, and the other was
with Barksdale, to say nothing of about a dozen great-uncles and so on."

"Well, you're entirely within your rights, Mr. Rand," Rivers conceded. "I
should apologize for trying to renege on a sale, but.... Well, I hope to
see you again, soon." He followed Rand to the door, shaking hands with
him. "Don't forget; I'm willing to pay anything up to twenty-five
thousand for the Fleming collection."




CHAPTER 6


The Fleming butler--Walters, Rand remembered Gladys Fleming having called
him--became apologetic upon learning who the visitor was.

"Forgive me, Colonel Rand, but I'm afraid I must put you to some
inconvenience, sir," he said. "You see, we have no chauffeur, at present,
and I don't drive very well, myself. Would you object to putting up your
own car, sir? The garage is under the house, at the rear; just follow the
driveway around. I'll go through the house and meet you there for the
luggage. I'm dreadfully sorry to put you to the trouble, but...."

"Oh, that's all right," Rand comforted him. "Just as soon do it, myself,
now, anyhow. I expect to be in and out with the car while I'm here, and
I'd better learn the layout of the garage now."

"You may back in, sir, or drive straight in and back out," the butler
told him. "One way's about as easy as the other."

Rand returned to his car, driving around the house. A row of doors opened
out of the basement garage; Walters, who must have gone through the house
on the double, was waiting for him. Having what amounted to a conditioned
reflex to park his car so that he could get it out as fast as possible,
he cut over to the right, jockeyed a little, and backed in. There were
already two cars in the garage; a big maroon Packard sedan, and a
sand-colored Packard station-wagon, standing side by side. Rand put
his Lincoln in on the left of the sedan.

"Bags in the luggage-compartment; it isn't locked," he told the butler,
making sure that the glove-compartment, where he had placed the Leech &
Rigdon revolver, was locked. As he got out, the servant went to the rear
of the car and took out the Gladstone and the B-4 bag Rand had brought
with him.

"If you don't mind entering the house from the rear, sir, we can go up
those steps, there, and through the rear hall," the butler suggested,
almost as though he were making some indecent and criminal proposal.

Rand told him to forget the protocol and lead the way. The butler picked
up the bags and conducted him up a short flight of concrete steps to a
landing and a door opening into a short hall above. An open door from
this gave access to a longer hall, stretching to the front of the house,
and there was a third door, closed, which probably led to the servants'
domain.

Rand followed his guide through the open door and into the long hall,
which passed under an arch to extend to the front door. There was a door
on either side, about midway to the arch under the front stairway; the
one on the right was the dining-room, Walters explained, and the one on
the left was the library. He seemed to be still suffering from the
ignominy of admitting a house-guest through any but the main portal.

Emerging into the front hallway, he put down the bags, took Rand's hat
and coat and laid them on top of the luggage, and then went to an open
doorway on the right, standing in it and coughing delicately, before
announcing that Colonel Rand was here.

Gladys Fleming, wearing a pale blue frock, came forward as Rand entered
the parlor, her hand extended. The two other women in the big parlor
remained motionless. They would be the sisters, Geraldine Varcek and
Nelda Dunmore. Rand didn't wonder that they resented Gladys so bitterly;
economic considerations aside, girls seldom enthuse over a stepmother so
near their own age who is so much more beautiful.

"Good afternoon, Colonel Rand," Gladys said. "This is Mrs. Varcek." She
indicated a very pale blonde who sat slumped in a deep chair beside a low
cocktail-table, a highball in her hand. "And Mrs. Dunmore." She was the
brunette with the full bust and hips, in the short black skirt and the
tight white sweater, who was standing by the fireplace.

"H'lo." The blonde--Geraldine--smiled shyly at him. She had big blue
eyes, and delicately tinted rose-petal lips that seemed to be trying not
to laugh at some private joke. She wasn't exactly blotto, but she had
evidently laid a good foundation for a first-class jag. After all, it was
only two thirty in the afternoon.

The other sister--Nelda--didn't say anything. She merely stood and stared
at Rand distrustfully. Rand doubted that she ordinarily gave men the
hostile eye. The full, dark-red lips; the lush figure; the way she draped
it against the side of the fireplace, to catch the ruddy light on her
more interesting curves and bulges--there was a bimbo just made to be
leered at, and she probably resented it like hell if she weren't.

Rand gave them a general good-afternoon, then turned to Gladys. "I had a
talk with Goode, yesterday afternoon," he said. "I have his authorization
to handle all the details. As soon as I get an itemized list, I'll
circularize dealers and other possible buyers and ask for offers."

"Is that all?" Nelda demanded angrily of Gladys. "Why Fred's done all
that already!"

"Is that correct, Mrs. Fleming?" Rand asked, for the record.

"I told you, yesterday, what's been done," Gladys replied. "Fred has
talked to one dealer, Arnold Rivers. There has been no inventory of any
sort made."

"Mr. Rivers is offering us ten thousand dollars," Nelda retorted. "I
don't see why you had to bring this Colonel What's-his-name into it, at
all. You think he can get us a better offer? If you do, you're crazy!"

"Ten thousand dollars, for a collection that ought to sell for five times
that, in Macy's basement!" Geraldine hooted. "How much is Rivers slipping
Fred, on the side?"

"Oh, go back to your bottle!" Nelda cried. "You're too drunk to know what
you're talking about!"

"They tell me Colonel Rand is a detective, too," Geraldine continued.
"Maybe he can find out why Fred never talked to Stephen Gresham, or Carl
Gwinnett, or anybody else except this Rivers. How much _is_ Fred getting
out of Rivers, anyhow?"

"My God, Geraldine, shut up!" Nelda howled. Then she decided to take
direct notice of Rand's presence. "Colonel Rand, I'm sorry to say that,
in her present condition, my sister doesn't know what she's saying. It's
bad enough for my stepmother to bring an outsider into what's obviously
a family matter, but when my sister begins making these ridiculous
accusations ..."

"What's ridiculous about them?" Geraldine demanded, dumping another two
ounces of whiskey into her glass and freshening it with the siphon. "I
think Rivers's offering ten thousand dollars for the collection, and
Fred's thinking we'd accept it, are the only ridiculous things about it."

"That's rather what I told Rivers, this afternoon," Rand put in. "He
seemed a bit upset about my being brought into this, too, but he finally
admitted that he was willing to pay up to twenty-five thousand dollars
for the collection, and if he buys it, that's exactly what it's going to
cost him."

"_What?_" Nelda fairly screamed. Her hands opened and closed
spasmodically: she was using a dark-red nail-tint that made Rand think
of blood-dripping talons.

"Mr. Arnold Rivers told me, this afternoon, and I quote: I'm willing to
pay up to twenty-five thousand dollars for that collection, unquote,"
Rand said. "And I can tell you now that twenty-five thousand dollars is
just what he will pay for it, unless I can find somebody who's willing to
pay more, which is not at all improbable."

"H'ray!" Geraldine waved her glass and toasted Rand with it. "And
twenty-five G ain't hay, brother!"

Gladys smiled quickly at Rand, then turned to Nelda. "Now I hope you see
why I thought it wise to bring in somebody who knows something about old
arms," she said.

Nelda evidently saw; there was apparently nothing stupid about her. "And
Fred was going to take a miserable ten thousand dollars!" The way she
said it, ten thousand sounded like a fairly generous headwaiter's tip.
"Did Rivers actually tell you he'd pay twenty-five?"

Rand gave, as nearly verbatim as possible, his conversation with the
dealer. "And he can afford it, too," he finished. "He can make a nice
profit on the collection, at that figure."

"My God, do you mean the pistols are worth more than that, even?" she
wanted to know, aghast.

"Certainly, if you're a dealer with an established business, and
customers all over the country, and want to take five or six years to
make your profit," Rand replied. "If you aren't, and want your money in
a hurry, no."

"That's why I was against turning the collection over to Gwinnett on a
commission basis," Gladys said. "It would take him five years to get
everything sold."

Nelda left the fireplace and advanced toward Rand. "Colonel, I owe you an
apology," she said. "I had no idea Father's pistols were worth anywhere
near that much. I don't suppose Fred did, either." She frowned. Wait till
she gets Fred alone, Rand thought; I'd hate to be in his spot.... "You
say you're acting on Humphrey Goode's authority?"

"That's right. I'll negotiate the sale, but the money will be paid
directly to him, for distribution according to the terms of your father's
will." Rand got out Goode's letter and handed it to Nelda.

She read it carefully. "I see." She seemed greatly relieved; she was
looking at Rand, now, as she was accustomed to look at men, particularly
handsome six-footers who were broad across the shoulders and narrow at
the hips and resembled King Charles II. She was probably wondering if
Rand was equal to Old Rowley in another important respect. "I didn't
understand ... I thought...." A dirty look, aimed at Gladys, explained
what she had thought. Then her glance fell on the bottle and siphon on
the table beside Geraldine's chair, and she changed the subject by
inquiring if Colonel Rand mightn't like a drink.

"Well, let's go up to the gunroom," Gladys suggested. "We can have our
drink up there, while Colonel Rand's looking at the pistols.... Coming
with us, Geraldine?"

Geraldine rose, not too steadily, her glass still in her hand, and took
Rand's left arm. Gladys, seeing Nelda moving in on the detective's right,
took his other arm. Nelda was barely successful in suppressing a look of
murderous anger. The double doorway into the hall was just wide enough
for Rand and his two flankers to pass through; Nelda had to fall in a
couple of paces rear of center, and wasn't able to come up into line
until they were in the hall upstairs.

"There's the gunroom." Gladys pointed. "And that's your room, over
there." As she spoke, Walters came out of the doorway she had indicated.

"Your bags are unpacked, sir," he reported. Then he told Rand where he
would find his things, and where the bath was.

There was a brief discussion of drinks. The butler received his
instructions and went down the stairway; Rand broke up the feminine
formation around him and ushered the ladies ahead of him into the
gunroom.

It was much as he remembered it from his visit of two years before.
There was a desk in one corner, and back of it a short workbench and
tool-cabinet. There was a long table in the middle of the room, its top
covered with green baize, upon which many flat rectangular boxes of
hardwood rested--some walnut, some rosewood, some quartered oak. Each
would contain a pistol or pair of pistols, with cleaning and loading
tools. In the corner farthest from the desk, he saw the head of the
spiral stairway from the library below, mentioned by Gladys Fleming.
There were ashstands and a couple of cocktail-tables, and a number of
chairs, and the old maple cobbler's bench on which Lane Fleming had died.
The only books in the room were in a small case over the workbench; they
were all arms-books.

Then he looked at the walls. On both ends, and on the long inside wall,
the pistols hung, hundreds and hundreds of them, the cream of a
lifetime's collecting. Horizontal white-painted boards had been fixed to
the walls about four feet from the floor, and similar boards had been
placed five feet above them. Between, narrow vertical strips, as wide
as a lath but twice as thick, were set. Rows of pistols were hung, the
barrels horizontal, on pairs of these strips, with screwhooks at grip
and muzzle. There were about a hundred such vertical rows of pistols.

Rand was still looking at them when the butler brought in the drinks;
when Gladys told the servant that that would be all, he went out, rather
reluctantly, by the spiral stairs to the library.

"Well, what do you think of them, Colonel Rand?" Gladys asked.

Rand tasted his whiskey and looked around. "It's one of the finest
collections in the country," he said. "I may even be able to find
somebody who'll top Rivers's offer, but don't be disappointed if I
don't.... By the way, did anybody help Mr. Fleming keep this stuff clean?
The room seems dry, but even so, they'd need an occasional wiping-off."

"Oh, Walters was always in here, going over the pistols," Nelda said.
"He's been in here every day, lately."

"I wonder if you could spare him to help me a little? I'll need somebody
who knows his way around here, at first."

"Why, of course," Gladys agreed. "He isn't very busy in the mornings, or
in the afternoons till close to dinner-time. Are you going to start work
today?"

"I'll have to. I'm going to see Stephen Gresham and his associates this
evening, and I'll want to know what I'm talking about."

They spent about fifteen minutes over their drinks, talking about the
collection. Rand and Gladys did most of the talking, in spite of Nelda's
best efforts to monopolize the conversation. Geraldine, after a few
minutes, retired into her private world and only roused herself when her
sister and stepmother were about to leave. When they went out, Gladys
promised to send Walters up directly; Rand heard her speaking to him at
the foot of the main stairway.




CHAPTER 7


When Walters entered, Rand had his pipe lit and was walking slowly around
the room, laying out the work ahead of him. Roughly, the earliest pieces
were on the extreme left, on the short north wall of the room, and the
most recent ones on the right, at the south end. This was, of course,
only relatively true; the pistols seemed to have been classified by type
in vertical rows, and chronologically from top to bottom in each row. The
collection seemed to consist of a number of intensely specialized small
groups, with a large number of pistols of general types added. For
instance, about midway on the long east wall, there were some thirty-odd
all-metal pistols, from wheel lock to percussion. There was a collection
of U.S. Martials, with two rows of the regulation pistols, flintlock and
percussion, of foreign governments, placed on the left, and the
collection of Colts on the right. After them came the other types of
percussion revolvers, and the later metallic-cartridge types.

It was an arrangement which made sense, from the arms student's point
of view, and Rand decided that it would make sense to the dealers and
museums to whom he intended sending lists. He would save time by
listing them as they were hung on the walls. Then, there were the cases
between the windows on the west wall, containing the ammunition
collection--examples of every type of fixed-pistol ammunition--and the
collection of bullet-molds and powder flasks and wheel lock spanners and
assorted cleaning and loading accessories. All that stuff would have to
be listed, too.

"I beg your pardon, sir," Walters broke in, behind him. "Mrs. Fleming
said that you wanted me."

"Oh, yes." Rand turned. "Is this the whole thing? What's on the walls,
here?"

"Yes, sir. There is also a wall-case containing a number of modern
pistols and revolvers, and several rifles and shotguns, in the room
formerly occupied by Mr. Fleming, but they are not part of the
collection, and they are now the personal property of Mrs. Fleming.
I understand that she intends selling at least some of them, on her
own account. Then, there is a quantity of ammunition and
ammunition-components in that closet under the workbench--cartridges,
primed cartridge-shells, black and smokeless powder, cartridge-primers,
percussion caps--but they are not part of the collection, either. I
believe Mrs. Fleming wants to sell most of that, too."

"Well, I'll talk to her about it. I may want to buy some of the
ammunition for myself," Rand said. "So I only need to bother with what's
on the walls, in this room?... By the way, did Mr. Fleming keep any sort
of record of his collection? A book, or a card-index, or anything like
that?"

"Why no, sir." Walters was positive. Then he hedged. "If he did, I never
saw or heard of anything of the sort. Mr. Fleming knew everything in this
room. I've seen him, downstairs, when somebody would ask him about
something, close his eyes as though trying to visualize and then give a
perfect description of any pistol in the collection. Or else, he could
enumerate all the pistols of a certain type; say, all the Philadelphia
Deringers, or all the Allen pepperboxes, or all the rim-fire Smith &
Wesson tip-back types. He had a remarkable memory for his pistols,
although it was not out of the ordinary otherwise, sir."

Rand nodded. Any collector--at least, any collector who was a serious
arms-student--could do that, particularly if he were a good visualizer
and kept his stuff in some systematic order. At the moment, he could have
named and described any or all of his own modest collection of two
hundred-odd pistols and revolvers.

"I was hoping he'd kept a record," he said. "A great many collectors do,
and it would have helped me quite a bit." He made up his mind to compile
such a record, himself, when he got back to New Belfast. It would be a
big help to Carter Tipton, when it came time to settle his own estate,
and a man on whom the Reaper has scored as many near-misses as on Jeff
Rand should begin to think of such things. "And how about writing
materials? And is there a typewriter available?"

There was: a cased portable was on the floor beside the workbench.
Walters showed him which desk drawers contained paper and other things.
There was, Rand noticed, a loaded .38 Colt Detective Special, in the
upper right-hand desk drawer.

"And these phones," the butler continued, indicating them. "This one is
a private outside phone; it doesn't connect with any other in the house.
The other is an extension. It has a buzzer; the outside phone has a
regular bell."

Rand thanked him for the information. Then, picking up a note-pad and
pencil, he started on the left of the collection, meaning to make a
general list and rough approximation of value for use in talking to
Gresham's friends that evening. Tomorrow he would begin on the detailed
list for use in soliciting outside offers.

Twenty-five wheel locks: four heavy South German dags, two singles
and a pair; three Saxon pistols, with sharply dropped grips, a pair
and one single; five French and Italian sixteenth-century pistols;
a pair of small pocket or sash pistols; a pair of French petronels,
and an extremely long seventeenth-century Dutch pistol with an
ivory-covered stock and a carved ivory Venus-head for a pommel; eight
seventeenth-century French, Italian and Flemish pistols. Rand noted them
down, and was about to pass on; then he looked sharply at one of them.

It was nothing out of the ordinary, as wheel locks go; a long Flemish
weapon of about 1640, the type used by the Royalist cavalry in the
English Civil War. There were two others almost like it, but this one was
in simply appalling condition. The metal was rough with rust, and
apparently no attempt had been made to clean it in a couple of centuries.
There was a piece cracked out of the fore-end, the ramrod was missing, as
was the front ramrod-thimble, both the trigger-guard and the butt-cap
were loose, and when Rand touched the wheel, it revolved freely if
sluggishly, betraying a broken spring or chain.

The vertical row next to it seemed to be all snaphaunces, but among them
Rand saw a pair of Turkish flintlocks. Not even good Turkish flintlocks;
a pair of the sort of weapons hastily thrown together by native craftsmen
or imported ready-made from Belgium for bazaar sale to gullible tourists.
Among the fine examples of seventeenth-century Brescian gunmaking above
and below it, these things looked like a pair of Dogpatchers in the
Waldorf's Starlight Room. Rand contemplated them with distaste, then
shrugged. After all, they might have had some sentimental significance;
say souvenirs of a pleasantly remembered trip to the Levant.

A few rows farther on, among some exceptionally fine flintlocks, all
of which pre-dated 1700, he saw one of those big Belgian navy pistols,
_circa_ 1800, of the sort once advertised far and wide by a certain
old-army-goods dealer for $6.95. This was a particularly repulsive
specimen of its breed; grimy with hardened dust and gummed oil, maculated
with yellow-surface-rust, the brasswork green with corrosion. It was
impossible to shrug off a thing like that. From then on, Rand kept his
eyes open for similar incongruities.

They weren't hard to find. There was a big army pistol, of Central
European origin and in abominable condition, among a row of fine
multi-shot flintlocks. Multi-shot ... Stephen Gresham had mentioned an
Elisha Collier flintlock revolver. It wasn't there. It should be hanging
about where this post-Napoleonic German thing was.

There was no Hall breech-loader, either, but there was a dilapidated old
Ketland. There were many such interlopers among the U.S. Martials: an
English ounce-ball cavalry pistol, a French 1777 and a French 1773, a
couple more $6.95 bargain-counter specials, a miserable altered S. North
1816. Among the Colts, there was some awful junk, including a big Spanish
hinge-frame .44 and a Belgian imitation of a Webley R.I.C. Model. There
weren't as many Paterson Colts as Gresham had spoken of, and the
Whitneyville Walker was absent. It went on like that; about a dozen of
the best pistols which Rand remembered having seen from two years ago
were gone, and he spotted at least twenty items which the late Lane
Fleming wouldn't have hung in his backyard privy, if he'd had one.

Well, that was to be expected. The way these pistols were arranged, the
absence of one from its hooks would have been instantly obvious. So, as
the good stuff had moved out, these disreputable changelings had moved
in.

"You had rather a shocking experience here, in Mr. Fleming's death," Rand
said, over his shoulder, to the butler.

"Oh, yes indeed, sir!" Walters seemed relieved that Rand had broken the
silence. "A great loss to all of us, sir. And so unexpected."

He didn't seem averse to talking about it, and went on at some length.
His story closely paralleled that of Gladys Fleming.

"Mr. Varcek called the doctor immediately," he said. "Then Mr. Dunmore
pointed out that the doctor would be obliged to notify either the coroner
or the police, so he called Mr. Goode, the family solicitor. That was
about twenty minutes after the shot. Mr. Goode arrived directly; he was
here in about ten minutes. I must say, sir, I was glad to see him; to
tell the truth, I had been afraid that the authorities might claim that
Mr. Fleming had shot himself deliberately."

Somebody else doesn't like the smell of that accident, Rand thought.
Aloud, he said:

"Mr. Goode lives nearby, then, I take it?"

"Oh, yes, sir. You can see his house from these windows. Over here, sir."

Rand looked out the window. The rain-soaked lawn of the Fleming residence
ended about a hundred yards to the west; beyond it, an orchard was
beginning to break into leaf, and beyond the orchard and another lawn
stood a half-timbered Tudor-style house, somewhat smaller than the
Fleming place. A path led down from it to the orchard, and another led
from the orchard to the rear of the house from which Rand looked.

"Must be comforting to know your lawyer's so handy," he commented. "And
what do you think, Walters? Are you satisfied, in your own mind, that Mr.
Fleming was killed accidentally?"

The servant looked at him seriously. "No, sir; I'm not," he replied.
"I've thought about it a great deal, since it happened, sir, and I just
can't believe that Mr. Fleming would have that revolver, and start
working on it, without knowing that it was loaded. That just isn't
possible, if you'll pardon me, sir. And I can't understand how he would
have shot himself while removing the charges. The fact is, when I came up
here at quarter of seven, to call him for cocktails, he had the whole
thing apart and spread out in front of him." The butler thought for a
moment. "I believe Mr. Dunmore had something like that in mind when he
called Mr. Goode."

"Well, what happened?" Rand asked. "Did the coroner or the doctor choke
on calling it an accident?"

"Oh no, sir; there was no trouble of any sort about that. You see, Dr.
Yardman called the coroner, as soon as he arrived, but Mr. Goode was here
already. He'd come over by that path you saw, to the rear of the house,
and in through the garage, which was open, since Mrs. Dunmore was out
with the coupé. They all talked it over for a while, and the coroner
decided that there would be no need for any inquest, and the doctor wrote
out the certificate. That was all there was to it."

Rand looked at the section of pistol-rack devoted to Colts.

"Which one was it?" he asked.

"Oh it's not here, sir," Walters replied. "The coroner took it away with
him."

"And hasn't returned it yet? Well, he has no business keeping it. It's
part of the collection, and belongs to the estate."

"Yes, sir. If I may say so, I thought it was a bit high-handed of him,
taking it away, myself, but it wasn't my place to say anything about it."

"Well, I'll make it mine. If that revolver's what I'm told it is, it's
too valuable to let some damned county-seat politician walk off with." A
thought occurred to him. "And if I find that he's disposed of it, this
county's going to need a new coroner, at least till the present incumbent
gets out of jail."

The buzzer of the extension phone went off like an annoyed rattlesnake.
Walters scooped it up, spoke into it, listened for a moment, and handed
it to Rand.

"For you, sir; Mrs. Fleming."

"Colonel Rand, Carl Gwinnett, the commission-dealer I told you about is
here," Gladys told him. "Do you want to talk to him?"

"Why, yes. Do I understand, now, that you and the other ladies want cash,
and don't want the collection peddled off piecemeal?... All right, send
him up. I'll talk to him."

A few minutes later, a short, compact-looking man of forty-odd entered
the gunroom, shifting a brief case to his left hand and extending his
right. Rand advanced to meet him and shook hands with him.

"You're Colonel Rand? Enjoyed your articles in the _Rifleman_," he said.
"Mrs. Fleming tells me you're handling the sale of the collection for the
estate."

"That's right, Mr. Gwinnett. Mrs. Fleming tells me you're interested."

"Yes. Originally, I offered to sell the collection for her on a
commission basis, but she didn't seem to care for the idea, and neither
do the other ladies. They all want spot cash, in a lump sum."

"Yes. Mrs. Fleming herself might have been interested in your
proposition, if she'd been sole owner. You could probably get more for
the collection, even after deducting your commission, than I'll be able
to, but the collection belongs to the estate, and has to be sold before
any division can be made."

"Yes, I see that. Well, how much would the estate, or you, consider a
reasonable offer?"

"Sit down, Mr. Gwinnett," Rand invited. "What would you consider a
reasonable offer, yourself? We're not asking any specific price; we're
just taking bids, as it were."

"Well, how much have you been offered, to date?"

"Well, we haven't heard from everybody. In fact, we haven't put out a
list, or solicited offers, except locally, as yet. But one gentleman has
expressed a willingness to pay up to twenty-five thousand dollars."

Gwinnett's face expressed polite skepticism. "Colonel Rand!" he
protested. "You certainly don't take an offer like that seriously?"

"I think it was made seriously," Rand replied. "A respectable profit
could be made on the collection, even at that price."

Gwinnett's eyes shifted over the rows of horizontal barrels on the walls.
He was almost visibly wrestling with mental arithmetic, and at the same
time trying to keep any hint of his notion of the collection's real value
out of his face.

"Well, I doubt if I could raise that much," he said. "Might I ask who's
making this offer?"

"You might; I'm afraid I couldn't tell you. You wouldn't want me to
publish your own offer broadcast, would you?"

"I think I can guess. If I'm right, don't hold your head in a tub of
water till you get it," Gwinnett advised. "Making a big offer to scare
away competition is one thing, and paying off on it is another. I've seen
that happen before, you know. Fact is, there's one dealer, not far from
here, who makes a regular habit of it. He'll make some fantastic offer,
and then, when everybody's been bluffed out, he'll start making
objections and finding faults, and before long he'll be down to about
a quarter of his original price."

"The practice isn't unknown," Rand admitted.

"I'll bet you don't have this twenty-five thousand dollar offer on paper,
over a signature," Gwinnett pursued. "Well, here." He opened his brief
case and extracted a sheet of paper, handing it to Rand. "You can file
this; I'll stand back of it."

Rand looked at the typed and signed statement to the effect that Carl
Gwinnett agreed to pay the sum of fifteen thousand dollars for the Lane
Fleming pistol-collection, in its entirety, within thirty days of date.
That was an average of six dollars a pistol. There had been a time, not
too long ago, when a pistol-collection with an average value of six
dollars, particularly one as large as the Fleming collection, had been
something unusual. For one thing, arms values had increased sharply in
the meantime. For another, Lane Fleming had kept his collection clean of
the two-dollar items which dragged down so many collectors' average
values. Except for the two-dozen-odd mysterious interlopers, there wasn't
a pistol in the Fleming collection that wasn't worth at least twenty
dollars, and quite a few had values expressible in three figures.

"Well, your offer is duly received and filed, Mr. Gwinnett," Rand told
him, folding the sheet and putting it in his pocket. "This is better
than an unwitnessed verbal statement that somebody is willing to pay
twenty-five thousand. I'll certainly bear you in mind."

"You can show that to Arnold Rivers, if you want to," Gwinnett said. "See
how much he's willing to commit himself to, over his signature."




CHAPTER 8


Pre-dinner cocktails in the library seemed to be a sort of household
rite--a self-imposed Truce of Bacchus before the resumption of
hostilities in the dining-room. It lasted from six forty-five to seven;
everybody sipped Manhattans and kept quiet and listened to the radio
newscast. The only new face, to Rand, was Fred Dunmore's.

It was a smooth, pinkly-shaven face, decorated with octagonal rimless
glasses; an entirely unremarkable face; the face of the type that used to
be labeled "Babbitt." The corner of Rand's mind that handled such data
subconsciously filed his description: forty-five to fifty, one-eighty,
five feet eight, hair brown and thinning, eyes blue. To this he added the
Rotarian button on the lapel, and the small gold globule on the watch
chain that testified that, when his age and weight had been considerably
less, Dunmore had played on somebody's basketball team. At that time he
had probably belonged to the Y.M.C.A., and had thought that Mussolini was
doing a splendid job in Italy, that H. L. Mencken ought to be deported to
Russia, and that Prohibition was here to stay. At company sales meetings,
he probably radiated an aura of synthetic good-fellowship.

As Rand followed Walters down the spiral from the gunroom, the radio
commercial was just starting, and Geraldine was asking Dunmore where
Anton was.

"Oh, you know," Dunmore told her, impatiently. "He had to go to
Louisburg, to that Medical Association meeting; he's reading a paper
about the new diabetic ration."

He broke off as Rand approached and was introduced by Gladys, who handed
both men their cocktails. Then the news commentator greeted them out of
the radio, and everybody absorbed the day's news along with their
Manhattans. After the broadcast, they all crossed the hall to the
dining-room, where hostilities began almost before the soup was cool
enough to taste.

"I don't see why you women had to do this," Dunmore huffed. "Rivers has
made us a fair offer. Bringing in an outsider will only give him the
impression that we lack confidence in him."

"Well, won't that be just too, too bad!" Geraldine slashed at him. "We
mustn't ever hurt dear Mr. Rivers's feelings like that. Let him have the
collection for half what it's worth, but never, never let him think we
know what a God-damned crook he is!"

Dunmore evidently didn't think that worth dignifying with an answer.
Doubtless he expected Nelda to launch a counter-offensive, as a matter of
principle. If he did, he was disappointed.

"Well?" Nelda demanded. "What did you want us to do; give the collection
away?"

"You don't understand," Dunmore told her. "You've probably heard somebody
say what the collection's worth, and you never stopped to realize that
it's only worth that to a dealer, who can sell it item by item. You can't
expect ..."

"We can expect a lot more than ten thousand dollars," Nelda retorted. "In
fact, we can expect more than that from Rivers. Colonel Rand was talking
to Rivers, this afternoon. Colonel Rand doesn't have any confidence in
Rivers at all, and he doesn't care who knows it."

"You were talking to Arnold Rivers, this afternoon, about the
collection?" Dunmore demanded of Rand.

"That's right," Rand confirmed. "I told him his ten thousand dollar offer
was a joke. Stephen Gresham and his friends can top that out of one
pocket. Finally, he got around to admitting that he's willing to pay up
to twenty-five thousand."

"I don't believe it!" Dunmore exclaimed angrily. "Rivers told me
personally, that neither he nor any other dealer could hope to handle
that collection profitably at more than ten thousand."

"And you believed that?" Nelda demanded. "And you're a business man? _My
God!_"

"He's probably a good one, as long as he sticks to pancake flour,"
Geraldine was generous enough to concede. "But about guns, he barely
knows which end the bullet comes out at. Ten thousand was probably his
idea of what we'd think the pistols were worth."

Dunmore ignored that and turned to Rand. "Did Arnold Rivers actually tell
you he'd pay twenty-five thousand dollars for the collection?" he asked.
"I can't believe that he'd raise his own offer like that."

"He didn't raise his offer; I threw it out and told him to make one that
could be taken seriously." Rand repeated, as closely as he could, his
conversation with the arms-dealer. When he had finished, Dunmore was
frowning in puzzled displeasure.

"And you think he's actually willing to pay that much?"

"Yes, I do. If he handles them right, he can double his money on the
pistols inside of five years. I doubt if you realize how valuable those
pistols are. You probably defined Mr. Fleming's collection as a 'hobby'
and therefore something not to be taken seriously. And, aside from the
actual profit, the prestige of handling this collection would be worth
a good deal to Rivers, as advertising. I haven't the least doubt that he
can raise the money, or that he's willing to pay it."

Dunmore was still frowning. Maybe he hated being proved wrong in front of
the women of the family.

"And you think Gresham and his friends will offer enough to force him to
pay the full amount?"

Rand laughed and told him to stop being naïve. "He's done that, himself,
and what's more, he knows it. When he told me he was willing to go as
high as twenty-five thousand, he fixed the price. Unless somebody offers
more, which isn't impossible."

"But maybe he's just bluffing." Dunmore seemed to be following Gwinnett's
line of thought. "After he's bluffed Gresham's crowd out, maybe he'll go
back to his original ten thousand offer."

"Fred, please stop talking about that ten thousand dollars!" Geraldine
interrupted. "How much did Rivers actually tell you he'd pay? Twenty-five
thousand, like he did Colonel Rand?"

Dunmore turned in his chair angrily. "Now, look here!" he shouted.
"There's a limit to what I've got to take from you...."

He stopped short, as Nelda, beside him, moved slightly, and his words
ended in something that sounded like a smothered moan. Rand suspected
that she had kicked her husband painfully under the table. Then Walters
came in with the meat course, and firing ceased until the butler had
retired.

"By the way," Rand tossed into the conversational vacuum that followed
his exit, "does anybody know anything about a record Mr. Fleming kept of
his collection?"

"Why, no; can't say I do," Dunmore replied promptly, evidently grateful
for the change of subject. "You mean, like an inventory?"

"Oh, Fred, you do!" Nelda told him impatiently. "You know that big gray
book Father kept all his pistols entered in."

"It was a gray ledger, with a black leather back," Gladys said. "He kept
it in the little bookcase over the workbench in the gunroom."

"I'll look for it," Rand said. "Sure it's still there? It would be a big
help to me."

The rest of the dinner passed in relative tranquillity. The conversation
proceeded in fairly safe channels. Dunmore was anxious to avoid any
further reference to the sum of ten thousand dollars; when Gladys induced
Rand to talk about his military experiences, he lapsed into preoccupied
silence. Several times, Geraldine and Nelda aimed halfhearted feline
swipes at one another, more out of custom than present and active
rancor. The women seemed to have erected a temporary tri-partite
_Entente_-more-or-less-_Cordiale_.

Finally, the meal ended, and the diners drifted away from the table. Rand
went to his room for a few moments, then went to the gunroom to get the
notes he had made. Fred Dunmore was using the private phone as he
entered.

"Well, never mind about that, now," he was saying. "We'll talk about
it when I see you.... Yes, of course; so am I.... Well, say about
eleven.... Be seeing you."

He hung up and turned to Rand. "More God-damned union trouble," he said.
"It's enough to make a saint lose his religion! Our factory-hands are
organized in the C.I.O., and our warehouse, sales, and shipping personnel
are in the A.F. of L., and if they aren't fighting the company, they're
fighting each other. Now they have some damn kind of a jurisdictional
dispute.... I don't know what this country's coming to!" He glared
angrily through his octagonal glasses for a moment. Then his voice took
on an ingratiating note. "Look here, Colonel; I just didn't understand
the situation, until you explained it. I hope you aren't taking anything
that sister-in-law of mine said seriously. She just blurts out the first
thing that comes into her so-called mind; why, only yesterday she was
accusing Gladys of bringing you into this to help her gyp the rest of us.
And before that ..."

"Oh, forget it." Rand dismissed Geraldine with a shrug. "I know she was
talking through a highball glass. As far as selling the collection is
concerned, you just let Rivers sell you a bill of something you hadn't
gotten a good look at. He's a smart operator, and he's crooked as a
wagon-load of blacksnakes. Maybe you never realized just how much money
Fleming put into this collection; naturally you wouldn't realize how much
could be gotten out of it again. A lot of this stuff has been here for
quite a while, and antiques of any kind tend to increase in value."

"Well, I want you to know that I'm just as glad as anybody if you can get
a better price out of him than I could." Dunmore smiled ruefully. "I
guess he's just a better poker player than I am."

"Not necessarily. He could see your hand, and you couldn't see his," Rand
told him.

"You going to see Gresham and his friends, this evening?" Dunmore asked.
"Well, when you get back, if you find four cars in the garage, counting
the station-wagon, lock up after you've put your own car away. If you
find only three, then you'll know that Anton Varcek's still out, so leave
it open for him. That's the way we do here; last one in locks up."




CHAPTER 9


Rand found another car, a smoke-gray Plymouth coupé, standing on the
left of his Lincoln when he went down to the garage. Running his car
outside and down to the highway, he settled down to his regular style of
driving--a barely legal fifty m.p.h., punctuated by bursts of absolutely
felonious speed whenever he found an unobstructed straightaway. Entering
Rosemont, he slowed and went through the underpass at the railroad
tracks, speeding again when he was clear of the village. A few minutes
later, he was turning into the crushed-limestone drive that led up to the
buff-brick Gresham house.

A girl met him at the door, a cute little redhead in a red-striped dress,
who gave him a smile that seemed to start on the bridge of her nose and
lift her whole face up after it. She held out her hand to him.

"Colonel Rand!" she exclaimed. "I'll bet you don't remember me."

"Sure I do. You're Dot," Rand said. "At least, I think you are; the last
time I saw you, you were in pigtails. And you were only about so high."
He measured with his hand. "The last time I was here, you were away at
school. You must be old enough to vote, by now."

"I will, this fall," she replied. "Come on in; you're the first one
here. Daddy hasn't gotten back from town yet. He called and said he'd
be delayed till about nine." In the hall she took his hat and coat and
guided him toward the parlor on the right.

"Oh, Mother!" she called. "Here's Colonel Rand!"

Rand remembered Irene Gresham, too; an over-age dizzy blonde who was
still living in the Flaming Youth era of the twenties. She was an
extremely good egg; he liked her very much. After all, insisting upon
remaining an F. Scott Fitzgerald character was a harmless and amusing
foible, and it was no more than right that somebody should try to keep
the bright banner of Jazz Age innocence flying in a grim and sullen
world. He accepted a cigarette, shared the flame of his lighter with
mother and daughter, and submitted to being gushed over.

"... and, honestly, Jeff, you get handsomer every year," Irene Gresham
rattled on. "Dot, doesn't he look just like Clark Gable in _Gone with the
Wind_? But then, of course, Jeff really _is_ a Southerner, so ..."

The doorbell interrupted this slight _non sequitur_. She broke off,
rising.

"Sit still, Jeff; I'm just going to see who it is. You know, we're down
to only one servant now, and it seems as if it's always her night off, or
something. I don't know, honestly, what I'm going to do...."

She hurried out of the room. Voices sounded in the hall; a man's and a
girl's.

"That's Pierre and Karen," Dot said. "Let's all go up in the gunroom, and
wait for the others there."

They went out to meet the newcomers. The man was a few inches shorter
than Rand, with gray eyes that looked startlingly light against the dark
brown of his face. He wasn't using a cane, but he walked with a slight
limp. Beside him was a slender girl, almost as tall as he was, with dark
brown hair and brown eyes. She wore a rust-brown sweater and a brown
skirt, and low-heeled walking-shoes.

Irene Gresham went into the introductions, the newcomers shook hands with
Rand and were advised that the style of address was "Jeff," rather than
"Colonel Rand," and then Dot suggested going up to the gunroom. Irene
Gresham said she'd stay downstairs; she'd have to let the others in.

"Have you seen this collection before?" Pierre Jarrett inquired as he and
Rand went upstairs together.

"About two years ago," Rand said. "Stephen had just gotten a cased
dueling set by Wilkinson, then. From the Far West Hobby Shop, I think."

"Oh, he's gotten a lot of new stuff since then, and sold off about a
dozen culls and duplicates," the former Marine said. "I'll show you
what's new, till the others come."

They reached the head of the stairs and started down the hall to the
gunroom, in the wing that projected out over the garage. Along the way,
the girls detached themselves for nose-powdering.

Unlike the room at the Fleming home, Stephen Gresham's gunroom had
originally been something else--a nursery, or play-room, or party-room.
There were windows on both long sides, which considerably reduced the
available wall-space, and the situation wasn't helped any by the fact
that the collection was about thirty per cent long-arms. Things were
pretty badly crowded; most of the rifles and muskets were in circular
barracks-racks, away from the walls.

"Here, this one's new since you were here," Pierre said, picking a long
musket from one of the racks and handing it to Rand. "How do you like
this one?"

Rand took it and whistled appreciatively. "Real European matchlock; no,
I never saw that. Looks like North Italian, say 1575 to about 1600."

"That musket," Pierre informed him, "came over on the _Mayflower_."

"Really, or just a gag?" Rand asked. "It easily could have. The
_Mayflower_ Company bought their muskets in Holland, from some
seventeenth-century forerunner of Bannerman's, and Europe was full of
muskets like this then, left over from the wars of the Holy Roman Empire
and the French religious wars."

"Yes; I suppose all their muskets were obsolete types for the period,"
Pierre agreed. "Well, that's a real _Mayflower_ arm. Stephen has the
documentation for it. It came from the Charles Winthrop Sawyer
collection, and there were only three ownership changes between the last
owner and the _Mayflower_ Company. Stephen only paid a hundred dollars
for it, too."

"That was practically stealing," Rand said. He carried the musket to the
light and examined it closely. "Nice condition, too; I wouldn't be afraid
to fire this with a full charge, right now." He handed the weapon back.
"He didn't lose a thing on that deal."

"I should say not! I'd give him two hundred for it, any time. Even
without the history, it's worth that."

"Who buys history, anyhow?" Rand wanted to know. "The fact that it came
from the Sawyer collection adds more value to it than this _Mayflower_
business. Past ownership by a recognized authority like Sawyer is a real
guarantee of quality and authenticity. But history, documented or
otherwise--hell, only yesterday I saw a pair of pistols with a wonderful
three-hundred-and-fifty-year documented history. Only not a word of it
was true; the pistols were made about twenty years ago."

"Those wheel locks Fleming bought from Arnold Rivers?" Pierre asked.
"God, wasn't that a crime! I'll bet Rivers bought himself a big drink
when Lane Fleming was killed. Fleming was all set to hang Rivers's scalp
in his wigwam.... But with Stephen, the history does count for
something. As you probably know, he collects arms-types that figured in
American history. Well, he can prove that this individual musket was
brought over by the Pilgrims, so he can be sure it's an example of the
type they used. But he'd sooner have a typical Pilgrim musket that never
was within five thousand miles of Plymouth Rock than a non-typical arm
brought over as a personal weapon by one of the _Mayflower_ Company."

"Oh, none of us are really interested in the individual history of
collection weapons," Rand said. "You show me a collection that's full of
known-history arms, and I'll show you a collection that's either full of
junk or else cost three times what it's worth. And you show me a
collector who blows money on history, and nine times out of ten I'll show
you a collector who doesn't know guns. I saw one such collection, once;
every item had its history neatly written out on a tag and hung onto the
trigger-guard. The owner thought that the patent-dates on Colts were
model-dates, and the model-dates on French military arms were dates of
fabrication."

Pierre wrinkled his nose disgustedly. "God, I hate to see a collection
all fouled up with tags hung on things!" he said. "Or stuck over with
gummed labels; that's even worse. Once in a while I get something with a
label pasted on it, usually on the stock, and after I get it off, there's
a job getting the wood under it rubbed up to the same color as the rest
of the stock."

"Yes. I picked up a lovely little rifled flintlock pistol, once," Rand
said. "American; full-length curly-maple stock; really a Kentucky rifle
in pistol form. Whoever had owned it before me had pasted a slip of paper
on the underside of the stock, between the trigger-guard and the lower
ramrod thimble, with a lot of crap, mostly erroneous, typed on it. It
took me six months to remove the last traces of where that thing had been
stuck on."

"What do you collect, or don't you specialize?"

"Pistols; I try to get the best possible specimens of the most important
types, special emphasis on British arms after 1700 and American arms
after 1800. What I'm interested in is the evolution of the pistol. I have
a couple of wheel locks, to start with, and three miguelet-locks and an
Italian snaphaunce. Then I have a few early flintlocks, and a number of
mid-eighteenth-century types, and some late flintlocks and percussion
types. And about twenty Colts, and so on through percussion revolvers and
early cartridge types to some modern arms, including a few World War II
arms."

"I see; about the same idea Lane Fleming had," Pierre said. "I collect
personal combat-arms, firearms and edge-weapons. Arms that either
influenced fighting techniques, or were developed to meet special combat
conditions. From what you say, you're mainly interested in the way
firearms were designed and made; I'm interested in the conditions under
which they were used. And Adam Trehearne, who'll be here shortly,
collects pistols and a few long-arms in wheel lock, proto-flintlock and
early flintlock, to 1700. And Philip Cabot collects U.S. Martials,
flintlock to automatic, and also enemy and Allied Army weapons from all
our wars. And Colin MacBride collects nothing but Colts. Odd how a Scot,
who's only been in this country twenty years, should become interested
in so distinctively American a type."

"And I collect anything I can sell at a profit, from Chinese matchlocks
to tommy-guns," Karen Lawrence interjected, coming into the room with Dot
Gresham.

Pierre grinned. "Karen is practically a unique specimen herself; the only
general-antique dealer I've ever seen who doesn't hate the sight of a
gun-collector."

"That's only because I'm crazy enough to want to marry one," the
girl dealer replied. "Of all the miserly, unscrupulous, grasping
characters ..." She expressed a doubt that the average gun-collector
would pay more than ten cents to see his Lord and Savior riding to hounds
on a Bren-carrier. "They don't give a hoot whose grandfather owned what,
and if anything's battered up a little, they don't think it looks quaint,
they think it looks lousy. And they've never heard of inflation; they
think arms ought still to sell for the sort of prices they brought at the
old Mark Field sale, back in 1911."

"What were you looking at?" Dot asked Rand, then glanced at the musket in
Pierre's hands. "Oh, Priscilla."

Karen laughed. "Dot not only knows everything in the collection; she
knows it by name. Dot, show Colonel Rand Hester Prynne."

"Hester coming up," Gresham's daughter said, catching another musket out
of the same rack from which Pierre had gotten the matchlock and passing
it over to Rand. He grasped the heavy piece, approving of the easy,
instinctive way in which the girl had handled it. "Look on the barrel,"
she told him. "On top, right at the breech."

The gun was a flintlock, or rather, a dog-lock; sure enough, stamped on
the breech was the big "A" of the Company of Workmen Armorers of London,
the seventeenth-century gunmakers' guild.

"That's right," he nodded. "That's Hester Prynne, all right; the first
American girl to make her letter."

There were footsteps in the hall outside, and male voices.

"Adam and Colin," Pierre recognized them before they entered.

Both men were past fifty. Colin MacBride was a six-foot black Highlander;
black eyes, black hair, and a black weeping-willow mustache, from under
which a stubby pipe jutted. Except when he emptied it of ashes and
refilled it, it was a permanent fixture of his weather-beaten face.
Trehearne was somewhat shorter, and fair; his sandy mustache, beginning
to turn gray at the edges, was clipped to micrometric exactness.

They shook hands with Rand, who set Hester back in her place. Trehearne
took the matchlock out of Pierre's hands and looked at it wistfully.

"Some chaps have all the luck," he commented. "What do you think of it,
Mr. Rand?" Pierre, who had made the introductions, had respected the
detective's present civilian status. "Or don't you collect long-arms?"

"I don't collect them, but I'm interested in anything that'll shoot.
That's a good one. Those things are scarce, too."

"Yes. You'll find a hundred wheel locks for every matchlock, and yet
there must have been a hundred matchlocks made for every wheel lock."

"Matchlocks were cheap, and wheel locks were expensive," MacBride
suggested. He spoke with the faintest trace of Highland accent.
"Naturally, they got better care."

"It would take a Scot to think of that," Karen said. "Now, you take a
Scot who collects guns, and you have something!"

"That's only part of it," Rand said. "I believe that by the last quarter
of the seventeenth century, most of the matchlocks that were lying around
had been scrapped, and the barrels used in making flintlocks. Hester
Prynne, over there, could easily have started her career as a matchlock.
And then, a great many matchlocks went into the West African slave and
ivory trade, and were promptly ruined by the natives."

"Yes, and I seem to recall having seen Spanish and French miguelet
muskets that looked as though they had been altered directly from
matchlock, retaining the original stock and even the original
lock-plate," Trehearne added.

"So have I, come to think of it." Rand stole a glance at his wrist-watch.
It was nine five; he was wishing Stephen Gresham would put in an
appearance.

MacBride and Trehearne joined Pierre and the girls in showing him
Gresham's collection; evidently they all knew it almost as well as their
own. After a while, Irene Gresham ushered in Philip Cabot. He, too, was
past middle age, with prematurely white hair and a thin, scholarly face.
According to Hollywood type-casting, he might have been a professor, or a
judge, or a Boston Brahmin, but never a stockbroker.

Irene Gresham wanted to know what everybody wanted to drink. Rand wanted
Bourbon and plain water; MacBride voted for Jamaica rum; Trehearne and
Cabot favored brandy and soda, and Pierre and the girls wanted Bacardi
and Coca-Cola.

"And Stephen'll want rye and soda, when he gets here," Irene said. "Come
on, girls; let's rustle up the drinks."

Before they returned, Stephen Gresham came in, lighting a cigar. It was
just nine twenty-two.

"Well, I see everybody's here," he said. "No; where's Karen?"

Pierre told him. A few minutes later the women returned, carrying bottles
and glasses; when the flurry of drink-mixing had subsided, they all sat
down.

"Let's get the business over first," Gresham suggested. "I suppose you've
gone over the collection already, Jeff?"

"Yes, and first of all, I want to know something. When was the last that
any of you saw it?"

Gresham and Pierre had been in Fleming's gunroom just two days before the
fatal "accident."

"And can you tell me if the big Whitneyville Colt was still there, then?"
Rand asked. "Or the Rappahannock Forge, or the Collier flintlock, or the
Hall?"

"Why, of course ... My God, aren't they there now?" Gresham demanded.

Rand shook his head. "And if Fleming still had them two days before he
was killed, then somebody's been weeding out the collection since. Doing
it very cleverly, too," he added. "You know how that stuff's arranged,
and how conspicuous a missing pistol would be. Well, when I was going
over the collection, I found about two dozen pieces of the most utter
trash, things Lane Fleming wouldn't have allowed in the house, all
hanging where some really good item ought to have been." He took a paper
from his pocket and read off a list of the dubious items, interpolating
comments on the condition, and a list of the real rarities which Gresham
had mentioned the day before, which were now missing.

"All that good stuff was there the last time I saw the collection,"
Gresham said. "What do you say, Pierre?"

"I had the Hall pistol in my hands," Pierre said. "And I remember looking
at the Rappahannock Forge."

Trehearne broke in to ask how many English dog-locks there were, and if
the snaphaunce Highlander and the big all-steel wheel lock were still
there. At the same time, Cabot was inquiring about the Springfield 1818
and the Virginia Manufactory pistols.

"I'll have a complete, itemized list in a few days," Rand said. "In the
meantime, I'd like a couple of you to look at the collection and help me
decide what's missing. I'm going to try to catch the thief, and then get
at the fence through him."

"Think Rivers might have gotten the pistols?" Gresham asked. "He's the
crookedest dealer I know of."

"He's the crookedest dealer anybody knows of," Rand amended. "The only
thing, he's a little too anxious to buy the collection, for somebody
who's just skimmed off the cream."

"Ten thousand dollars isn't much in the way of anxiety," Cabot said. "I'd
call that a nominal bid, to avoid suspicion."

"The dope's changed a little on that." Rand brought him up to date.
"Rivers's offer is now twenty-five thousand."

There was a stunned hush, followed by a gust of exclamations.

"Guid Lorrd!" The Scots accent fairly curdled on Colin MacBride's tongue.
"We canna go over that!"

"I'm afraid not; twenty would be about our limit," Gresham agreed. "And
with the best items gone ..." He shrugged.

Pierre and Karen were looking at each other in blank misery; their dream
of establishing themselves in the arms business had blown up in their
faces.

"Oh, he's talking through his hat!" Cabot declared. "He just hopes we'll
lose interest, and then he'll buy what's left of the collection for a
song."

"Maybe he knows the collection's been robbed," Trehearne suggested. "That
would let him out, later. He'd accuse you or the Fleming estate of
holding out the best pieces, and then offer to take what's left for about
five thousand."

"Well, that would be presuming that he knows the collection has been
robbed," Cabot pointed out. "And the only way he'd know that would be if
he, himself, had bought the stolen pistols."

"Well, does anybody need a chaser to swallow that?" Trehearne countered.
"I'm bloody sure I don't."

Karen Lawrence shook her head. "No, he'd pay twenty-five thousand for the
collection, just as it stands, to keep Pierre and me out of the arms
business. This end of the state couldn't support another arms-dealer, and
with the reputation he's made for himself, he'd be the one to go under."
She stubbed out her cigarette and finished her drink. "If you don't mind,
Pierre, I think I'll go home."

"I'm not feeling very festive, myself, right now." The ex-Marine rose and
held out his hand to Rand. "Don't get the idea, Jeff, that anybody here
holds this against you. You have your clients' interests to look out
for."

"Well, if this be treason make the most of it," Rand said, "but I hope
Rivers doesn't go through with it. I'd like to see you people get the
collection, and I'd hate to see a lot of nice pistols like that get into
the hands of a damned swindler like Rivers.... Maybe I can catch him with
the hot-goods on him, and send him up for about three-to-five."

"Oh, he's too smart for that," Karen despaired. "He can get away with
faking, but the dumbest jury in the world would know what receiving
stolen goods was, and he knows it."

Dorothy and Irene Gresham accompanied Pierre and Karen downstairs. After
they had gone, Gresham tried, not very successfully, to inject more life
into the party with another round of drinks. For a while they discussed
the personal and commercial iniquities of Arnold Rivers. Trehearne and
MacBride, who had come together in the latter's car, left shortly, and
half an hour later, Philip Cabot rose and announced that he, too, was
leaving.

"You haven't seen my collection since before the war, Jeff," he said. "If
you're not sleepy, why don't you stop at my place and see what's new?
You're staying at the Flemings'; my house is along your way, about a mile
on the other side of the railroad."

They went out and got into their cars. Rand kept Cabot's taillight in
sight until the broker swung into his drive and put his car in the
garage. Rand parked beside the road, took the Leech & Rigdon out of the
glove-box, and got out, slipping the Confederate revolver under his
trouser-band. He was pulling down his vest to cover the butt as he went
up the walk and joined his friend at the front door.

Cabot's combination library and gunroom was on the first floor. Like
Rand's own, his collection was hung on racks over low bookcases on either
side of the room. It was strictly a collector's collection, intensely
specialized. There were all but a few of the U.S. regulation single-shot
pistols, a fair representation of secondary types, most of the revolvers
of the Civil War, and all the later revolvers and automatics. In
addition, there were British pistols of the Revolution and 1812,
Confederate revolvers, a couple of Spanish revolvers of 1898, the Lugers
and Mausers and Steyers of the first World War, and the pistols of all
our allies, beginning with the French weapons of the Revolution.

"I'm having the devil's own time filling in for this last war," Cabot
said. "I have a want-ad running in the _Rifleman_, and I've gotten a few:
that Nambu, and that Japanese Model-14, and the Polish Radom, and the
Italian Glisenti, and that Tokarev, and, of course, the P-'38 and the
Canadian Browning; but it's going to take the devil's own time. I hope
nobody starts another war, for a few years, till I can get caught up on
the last one."

Rand was looking at the Confederate revolvers. Griswold & Grier, Haiman
Brothers, Tucker & Sherrod, Dance Brothers & Park, Spiller & Burr--there
it was: Leech & Rigdon. He tapped it on the cylinder with a finger.

"Wasn't it one of those things that killed Lane Fleming?" he asked.

"Leech & Rigdon? So I'm told." Cabot hesitated. "Jeff, I saw that
revolver, not four hours before Fleming was shot. Had it in my hands;
looked it over carefully." He shook his head. "It absolutely was not
loaded. It was empty, and there was rust in the chambers."

"Then how the hell did he get shot?" Rand wanted to know.

"That I couldn't say; I'm only telling you how he didn't get shot. Here,
this is how it was. It was a Thursday, and I'd come halfway out from town
before I remembered that I hadn't bought a copy of _Time_, so I stopped
at Biddle's drugstore, in the village, for one. Just as I was getting
into my car, outside, Lane Fleming drove up and saw me. He blew his horn
at me, and then waved to me with this revolver in his hand. I went over
and looked at it, and he told me he'd found it hanging back of the
counter at a barbecue-stand, where the road from Rosemont joins Route 22.
There had been some other pistols with it, and I went to see them later,
but they were all trash. The Leech & Rigdon had been the only decent
thing there, and Fleming had talked it out of this fellow for ten
dollars. He was disgustingly gleeful about it, particularly as it was
a better specimen than mine."

"Would you know it, if you saw it again?" Rand asked.

"Yes. I remember the serials. I always look at serials on Confederate
arms. The highest known serial number for a Leech & Rigdon is 1393; this
one was 1234."

Rand pulled the .36 revolver from his pants-leg and gave it a quick
glance; the number was 1234. He handed it to Cabot.

"Is this it?" he asked.

Cabot checked the number. "Yes. And I remember this bruise on the left
grip; Fleming was saying that he was glad it would be on the inside, so
it wouldn't show when he hung it on the wall." He carried the revolver to
the desk and held it under the light. "Why, this thing wasn't fired at
all!" he exclaimed. "I thought that Fleming might have loaded it, meaning
to target it--he had a pistol range back of his house--but the chambers
are clean." He sniffed at it. "Hoppe's Number Nine," he said. "And I can
see traces of partly dissolved rust, and no traces of fouling. What the
devil, Jeff?"

"It probably hasn't been fired since Appomattox," Rand agreed. "Philip,
do you think all this didn't-know-it-was-loaded routine might be an
elaborate suicide build-up, either before or after the fact?"

"Absolutely not!" There was a trace of impatience in Cabot's voice. "Lane
Fleming wasn't the man to commit suicide. I knew him too well ever to
believe that."

"I heard a rumor that he was about to lose control of his company," Rand
mentioned. "You know how much Premix meant to him."

"That's idiotic!" Cabot's voice was openly scornful, now, and he seemed
a little angry that Rand should believe such a story, as though his
confidence in his friend's intelligence had been betrayed. "Good Lord,
Jeff, where did you ever hear a yarn like that?"

"Quote, usually well-informed sources, unquote."

"Well, they were unusually ill-informed, that time," Cabot replied. "Take
my word for it, there's absolutely nothing in it."

"So it wasn't an accident, and it wasn't suicide," Rand considered.
"Philip, what is the prognosis on this merger of Premix and National
Milling & Packaging, now that Lane Fleming's opposition has been, shall
we say, liquidated?"

Cabot's head jerked up; he looked at Rand in shocked surprise.

"My God, you don't think...?" he began. "Jeff, are you investigating Lane
Fleming's death?"

"I was retained to sell the collection," Rand stated. "Now, I suppose,
I'll have to find out who's been stealing those pistols, and recover
them, and jail the thief and the fence. But I was not retained to
investigate the death of Lane Fleming. And I do not do work for which
I am not paid," he added, with mendacious literalness.

"I see. Well, the merger's going through. It won't be official until the
sixteenth of May, when the Premix stockholders meet, but that's just a
formality. It's all cut and dried and in the bag now. Better let me pick
you up a little Premix; there's still some lying around. You'll make a
little less than four-for-one on it."

"I'd had that in mind when I asked you about the merger," Rand said. "I
have about two thousand with you, haven't I?" He did a moment's mental
arithmetic, then got out his checkbook. "Pick me up about a hundred
shares," he told the broker. "I've been meaning to get in on this ever
since I heard about it."

"I don't see how you did hear about it," Cabot said. "For obvious
reasons, it's being kept pretty well under the hat."

Rand grinned. "Quote, usually well-informed sources, unquote. Not the
sources mentioned above."

"Jeff, you know, this damned thing's worrying me," Cabot told him,
writing a receipt and exchanging it for Rand's check. "I've been trying
to ignore it, but I simply can't. Do you really think Lane Fleming was
murdered by somebody who wanted to see this merger consummated and who
knew that that was an impossibility as long as Fleming was alive?"

"Philip, I don't know. And furthermore, I don't give a damn," Rand lied.
"If somebody wants me to look into it, and pays me my possibly
exaggerated idea of what constitutes fair compensation, I will. And I'll
probably come up with Fleming's murderer, dead or alive. But until then,
it is simply no epidermis off my scrotum. And I advise you to adopt a
similar attitude."

They changed the subject, then, to the variety of pistols developed and
used by the opposing nations in World War II, and the difficulties ahead
of Cabot in assembling even a fairly representative group of them. Rand
promised to mail Cabot a duplicate copy of his list of the letter-code
symbols used by the Nazis to indicate the factories manufacturing arms
for them, as well as copies of some old wartime Intelligence dope on
enemy small-arms. At a little past one, he left Cabot's home and returned
to the Fleming residence.

There were four cars in the garage. The Packard sedan had not been moved,
but the station-wagon was facing in the opposite direction. The gray
Plymouth was in the space from which Rand had driven earlier in the
evening, and a black Chrysler Imperial had been run in on the left of the
Plymouth. He put his own car in on the right of the station-wagon, made
sure that the Leech & Rigdon was locked in his glove-box, and closed and
locked the garage doors. Then he went up into the house, through the
library, and by the spiral stairway to the gunroom.

The garage had been open, he recalled, at the time of Lane Fleming's
death. The availability of such an easy means of undetected ingress and
egress threw the suspect field wide open. Anybody who knew the habits of
the Fleming household could have slipped up to the gunroom, while Varcek
was in his lab, Dunmore was in the bathroom, and Gladys and Geraldine
were in the parlor. As he crossed the hall to his own room, Rand was
thinking of how narrowly Arnold Rivers had escaped a disastrous lawsuit
and criminal action by the death of Lane Fleming.




CHAPTER 10


When Rand came down to breakfast the next morning, he found Gladys,
Nelda, and a man whom he decided, by elimination, must be Anton Varcek,
already at the table. The latter rose as Rand entered, and bowed jerkily
as Gladys verified the guess with an introduction.

He was about Rand's own age and height; he had a smooth-shaven,
tight-mouthed face, adorned with bushy eyebrows, each of which was almost
as heavy as Rand's mustache. It was a face that seemed tantalizingly
familiar, and Rand puzzled for a moment, then nodded mentally. Of course
he had seen a face like that hundreds of times, in newsreels and
news-photos, and, once in pre-war Berlin, its living double. Rudolf Hess.
He wondered how much deeper the resemblance went, and tried not to let it
prejudice him.

Nelda greeted him with a trowelful of sweetness and a dash of
bedroom-bait. Gladys waved him to a vacant seat at her right and summoned
the maid who had been serving breakfast. After Rand had indicated his
preference of fruit and found out what else there was to eat, he inquired
where the others were.

"Oh, Fred's still dressing; he'll be down in a minute," Nelda told him.
"And Geraldine won't; she never eats with her breakfast."

Varcek winced slightly at this, and shifted the subject by inquiring if
Rand were a professional antiques-expert.

"No, I'm a lily-pure amateur," Rand told him. "Or was until I took this
job. I have a collection of my own, and I'm supposed to be something of
an authority. My business is operating a private detective agency."

"But you are here only as an arms-expert?" Varcek inquired. "You are not
making any sort of detective investigation?"

"That's right," Rand assured him. "This is practically a paid vacation,
for me. First time I ever handled anything like this; it's a real
pleasure to be working at something I really enjoy, for a change."

Varcek nodded. "Yes, I can understand that. My own work, for instance. I
would continue with my research even if I were independently wealthy and
any sort of work were unnecessary."

"Tell Colonel Rand what you're working on now," Nelda urged.

Varcek gave a small mirthless laugh. "Oh, Colonel Rand would be no more
interested than I would be in his pistols," he objected, then turned to
Rand. "It is a series of experiments having to do with the chemical
nature of life," he said. Another perfunctory chuckle. "No, I am not
trying to re-create Frankenstein's monster. The fact is, I am working
with fruit flies."

"Something about heredity?" Rand wanted to know.

Varcek laughed again, with more amusement. "So! One says: 'Fruit flies,'
and immediately another thinks: 'Heredity.' It is practically a standard
response. Only, in this case, I am investigating the effect of diet
changes. I use fruit flies because of their extreme adaptability. If
I find that I am on the right track, I shall work with mice, next."

"Fred Dunmore mentioned a packaged diabetic ration you'd developed," Rand
mentioned.

"Oh, yes." Varcek shrugged. "Yes. Something like an Army field-ration,
for diabetics to carry when traveling, or wherever proper food may be
unobtainable. That is for the company; soon we put it on the market, and
make lots of money. But this other, that is my own private work."

Dunmore had come in while Varcek was speaking and had seated himself
beside his wife.

"Don't let him kid you, Colonel," he said. "Anton's just as keen
about that dollar as the rest of us. I don't know what he's cooking
up, up there in the attic, but I'll give ten-to-one we'll be selling
it in twenty-five-cent packages inside a year, and selling plenty of
them.... Oh, and speaking about that dollar; how did you make out with
Gresham and his friends?"

"I didn't. They'd expected to pay about twenty thousand for the
collection; Rivers's offer has them stopped. And even if they could go
over twenty-five, I think Rivers would raise them. He's afraid to let
them get the collection; Pierre Jarrett and Karen Lawrence intended
using their share of it to go into the old-arms business, in competition
with him."

"Uh-huh, that's smart," Dunmore approved. "It's always better to take a
small loss stopping competition than to let it get too big for you. You
save a damn-sight bigger loss later."

"How soon do you think the pistols will be sold?" Gladys asked.

"Oh, in about a month, at the outside," Rand said, continuing to explain
what had to be done first.

"Well, I'm glad of that," Varcek commented. "I never liked those things,
and after what happened ... The sooner they can be sold, the better."

Breakfast finally ended, and Varcek and Dunmore left for the Premix
plant. Rand debated for a moment the wisdom of speaking to Gladys about
the missing pistols, then decided to wait until his suspicions were
better verified. After a few minutes in the gunroom, going over Lane
Fleming's arms-books on the shelf over the workbench without finding any
trace of the book in which he had catalogued his collection, he got his
hat and coat, went down to the garage, and took out his car.

It had stopped raining for the time being; the dingy sky showed broken
spots like bits of bluing on a badly-rusted piece of steel. As he got out
of his car in front of Arnold Rivers's red-brick house, he was wondering
just how he was going to go about what he wanted to do. After all ...

The door of the shop was unlocked, and opened with a slow clanging of the
door-chime, but the interior was dark. All the shades had been pulled,
and the lights were out. For a moment Rand stood in the doorway,
adjusting his eyes to the darkness within and wondering where everybody
was.

Then, in the path of light that fell inward from the open door, he saw
two feet in tan shoes, toes up, at the end of tweed-trousered legs, on
the floor. An instant later he stepped inside, pulled the door shut after
him, and was using his pen-light to find the electric switch.

For a second or so after he snapped it nothing happened, and then the
darkness was broken by the flickering of fluorescent tubes. When they
finally lit, he saw the shape on the floor, arms outflung, the inverted
rifle above it. For a seemingly long time he stood and stared at the
grotesquely transfixed body of Arnold Rivers.

The dead man lay on his back, not three feet beyond the radius of the
door, in a pool of blood that was almost dried and gave the room a
sickly-sweet butchershop odor. Under the back of Rand's hand, Rivers's
cheek was cold; his muscles had already begun to stiffen in _rigor
mortis_. Rand examined the dead man's wounds. His coat was stained with
blood and gashed in several places; driven into his chest by a downward
blow, the bayonet of a short German service Mauser pinned him to the
floor like a specimen on a naturalist's card. Beside the one in which
the weapon remained, there were three stab-wounds in the chest, and the
lower part of the face was disfigured by what looked like a butt-blow.
Bending over, Rand could see the imprint of the Mauser butt-plate on
Rivers's jaw; on the butt-plate itself were traces of blood.

The rifle, a regulation German infantry weapon, the long-familiar _Gewehr
'98_ in its most recent modification, was a Nazi product, bearing the
eagle and encircled swastika of the Third Reich and the code-letters
_lza_--the symbol of the Mauserwerke A.G. plant at Karlsruhe. It had
doubtless been sold to Rivers by some returned soldier. In a rack beside
the door were a number of other bolt-action military rifles--a Krag, a
couple of Arisakas, a long German infantry rifle of the first World War,
a Greek Mannlicher, a Mexican Mauser, a British short model Lee-Enfield.
All had fixed bayonets; between the Lee-Enfield and one of the Arisakas
there was a vacancy.

Rivers's carved ivory cigarette-holder was lying beside the body, crushed
at the end as though it had been stepped on. A half-smoked cigarette had
been in it; it, too, was crushed. There was no evidence of any great
struggle, however; the attack which had ended the arms-dealer's life must
have come as a complete surprise. He had probably been holding the
cigarette-holder in his hand when the butt-blow had been delivered, and
had dropped it and flung up his arms instinctively. Thereupon, his
assailant had reversed his weapon and driven the bayonet into his chest.
The first blow, no doubt, had been fatal--it could have been any of the
three stabs in the chest--but the killer had given him two more, probably
while he was on the floor. Then, grasping the rifle in both hands, he had
stood over his victim and pinned the body to the floor. That last blow
could have only been inspired by pure anger and hatred.

Yet, apparently, Rivers had been unaware of his visitor's murderous
intentions, even while the rifle was being taken from the rack. Rand
strolled back through the shop, looking about. Someone had been here with
Rivers for some time; the dealer and another man had sat by the fire,
drinking and smoking. On the low table was a fifth of Haig & Haig, a
siphon, two glasses, a glass bowl containing water that had evidently
melted from ice-cubes, and an ashtray. In the ashtray were a number of
River's cigarette butts, all holder-crimped, and a quantity of ash, some
of it cigar-ash. There was no cigar-butt, and no band or cellophane
wrapper.

The fire on the hearth had burned out and the ashes were cold. They were
not all wood-ashes; a considerable amount of paper--no, cardboard--had
been burned there also. Poking gently with the point of a sword he took
from a rack, Rand discovered that what had been burned had been a number
of cards, about six inches by four, one of which had, somehow, managed to
escape the flames with nothing more than a charred edge. Improvising
tweezers from a pipe-cleaner, he picked this up and looked at it. It had
been typewritten:

4850:

English Screw-Barrel F/L Pocket Pistol. _Queen Anne type, side
hammer with pan attached to barrel, steel barrel and frame. Marked:
Wilson, Minories, London. Silver masque butt-cap, hallmarked for 1723.
4-1/2" barrel; 9-1/4" O.A.; cal. abt .44. Taken in trade, 3/21/'38, from
V. Sparling, for Kentuck #2538, along with 4851, 4852, 4853. App. cost,
RLss; Replacement, do. NLss, OSss, LSss._

To this had been added, in pen:

_Sold, R. Kingsley, St. Louis, Mo., Mail order, 12/20/'42, OSss._

Rand laid the card on the cocktail-table, along with the drinking
equipment. At least, he knew what had gone into the fire: Arnold Rivers's
card-index purchase and sales record. He doubted very strongly if that
would have been burned while its owner was still alive. Going over to the
desk, he checked; the drawer from which he had seen Cecil Gillis get the
card for the Leech & Rigdon had been cleaned out.

Picking up the phone in an awkward, unnatural manner, he used a pencil
from his pocket to dial a number with which he was familiar, a number
that meant the same thing on any telephone exchange in the state.

"State Police, Corporal Kavaalen," a voice singsonged out of the
receiver.

"My name is Rand," he identified himself. "I am calling from Arnold
Rivers's antique-arms shop on Route 19, about a mile and a half east of
Rosemont. I am reporting a homicide."

"Yeah, go ahead--Hey! Did you say homicide?" the other voice asked
sharply. "Who?"

"Rivers himself. I called at his shop a few minutes ago, found the front
door open, and walked in. I found Rivers lying dead on the floor, just
inside the door. He had been killed with a Mauser rifle--not shot;
clubbed with the butt, and bayoneted. The body is cold, beginning to
stiffen; a pool of blood on the floor is almost completely dried."

"That's a good report, mister," the corporal approved. "You stick around;
we'll be right along. You haven't touched anything, have you?"

"Not around the body. How long will it take you to get here?"

"About ten minutes. I'll tell Sergeant McKenna right away."

Rand hung up and glanced at his watch. Ten twenty-two; he gave himself
seven minutes and went around the room rapidly, looking only at pistols.
He saw nothing that might have come from the Fleming collection. Finally,
he opened the front door, just as a white State Police car was pulling up
at the end of the walk.

Sergeant Ignatius Loyola McKenna--customarily known and addressed as
Mick--piled out almost before it had stopped. The driver, a stocky,
blue-eyed Finn with a corporal's chevrons, followed him, and two privates
got out from behind, dragging after them a box about the size and shape
of an Army footlocker. McKenna was halfway up the drive before he
recognized Rand. Then he stopped short.

"Well, Jaysus-me-beads!" He turned suddenly to the corporal. "My God,
Aarvo; you said his name was Grant!"

"That's what I thought he said." Rand recognized the singsong accent he
had heard on the phone. "You know him?"

"Know him?" McKenna stepped aside quickly, to avoid being overrun by the
two privates with the equipment-box. He sighed resignedly. "Aarvo, this
is the notorious Jefferson Davis Rand. Tri-State Agency, in New Belfast."
He gestured toward the Finn. "Corporal Aarvo Kavaalen," he introduced.
"And Privates Skinner and Jameson.... Well, where is it?"

"Right inside." Rand stepped backward, gesturing them in. "Careful; it's
just inside the doorway."

McKenna and the corporal entered; the two privates set down their box
outside and followed. They all drew up in a semicircle around the late
Arnold Rivers and looked at him critically.

"Jesus!" Kavaalen pronounced the _J_-sound as though it were _Zh_; he
gave all his syllables an equally-accented intonation. "Say, somebody
gave him a good job!"

"Somebody's been seeing too many war-movies." McKenna got a cigarette out
of his tunic pocket and lit it in Rand's pipe-bowl. "Want to confess now,
or do you insist on a third degree with all the trimmings?"

Kavaalen looked wide-eyed at Rand, then at McKenna, and then back at
Rand. Rand laughed.

"Now, Mick!" he reproved. "You know I never kill anybody unless I have
a clear case of self-defense, and a flock of witnesses to back it up."

McKenna nodded and reassured his corporal. "That's right, Aarvo; when
Jeff Rand kills anybody, it's always self-defense. And he doesn't
generally make messes like this." He gave the body a brief scrutiny, then
turned to Rand. "You looked around, of course; what do you make of it?"

"Last night, sometime," Rand reconstructed, "Rivers had a visitor. A man,
who smoked cigars. He and Rivers were on friendly, or at least sociable,
terms. They sat back there by the fire for some time, smoking and
drinking. The shades were all drawn. I don't know whether that was
standard procedure, or because this conference was something clandestine.
Finally, Rivers's visitor got up to leave.

"Now, of course, he could have left, and somebody else could have come
here later, been admitted, and killed Rivers. That's a possibility," Rand
said, "but it's also an assumption without anything to support it. I
rather like the idea that the man who sat back there drinking and smoking
with Rivers was the killer. If so, Rivers must have gone with him to the
door and was about to open it when this fellow picked up that rifle,
probably from that rack, over there, and clipped him on the jaw with
the butt. Then he gave him the point three times, the second and third
probably while Rivers was down. Then he swung it up and slammed down with
it, and left it sticking through Rivers and in the floor."

McKenna nodded. "Lights on when you got here?" he asked.

"No; I put them on when I came in. The killer must have turned them off
when he left, but the deadlatch on the door wasn't set, and he doesn't
seem to have bothered checking on that."

"Think he left right after he killed Rivers?"

Rand shook his head. "No, that was just the first part of it. After he'd
finished Rivers, he went back to that desk and got all the cards Rivers
used to record his transactions on--an individual card for every item. He
destroyed the lot of them, or at least most of them, in the fireplace.
Now, I'm only guessing, here, but I think he took out a card or cards in
which he had some interest, and then dumped the rest in the fire to
prevent anybody from being able to determine which ones he was interested
in. I am further guessing that the cards which the killer wanted to
suppress were in the 'sold' file. But I am not guessing about the
destruction of the record-file; I found the fireplace full of ashes,
found one card that had escaped unburned--you can be sure that one
wasn't important--and found the drawer where the record-system was kept
empty."

"Think he might have stolen something, and covered up by burning the
cards?" McKenna asked.

Rand shook his head again. "I was here yesterday; bought a pistol from
Rivers. That's how I noticed this card-index system. Of course, I didn't
look at everything, while I was here, but I can't see where any quantity
of arms have been removed, and Rivers didn't have any single item that
was worth a murder. Fact is, no old firearm is. There are only a very few
old arms that are worth over a thousand dollars, and most of them are
well-known, unique specimens that would be unsaleable because every
collector would know where it came from."

"We can check possible thefts with Rivers's clerk, when he gets here,"
McKenna said. "Now, suppose you show me these things you found, back at
the rear ... Aarvo, you and the boys start taking pictures," he told
the corporal, then he followed Rand back through the shop.

He tested the temperature of the water in the ice-bowl with his finger.
He looked at the ashtray, and bent over and sniffed at each of the two
glasses.

"I see one of them's been emptied out," he commented. "Want to bet it
hasn't been wiped clean, too?"

"Huh-unh." Rand smiled slightly. "Even the tiny tots wipe off the
cookie-jar, after they've raided it," he said.

A flash-bulb lit the front of the shop briefly. Corporal Kavaalen said
something to the others. McKenna picked up the card Rand had found by the
edges and looked at it.

"What in hell's this all about, Jeff?" he asked.

"Rivers made it out for one of his pistols. An English flintlock
pocket-pistol; I can show you one almost like it, up front. He'd gotten
it and three others, back in 1938, in trade for a Kentucky rifle. The
numbers are reference-numbers; the letters are Rivers's private
price-code. Those three at the end are, respectively, what he absolutely
had to get for it, what he thought was a reasonable price, and the most
he thought the traffic would stand. He sold it in 1942 for his middle
price."

There was another flash by the door, then Kavaalen called out:

"Hey, Mick; we got two of the stiffs, now. All right if we pull out the
bayonet for a close-up of his chest?"

"Sure. Better chalkline it, first; you'll move things jerking that
bayonet out." He turned back to Rand. "You think, then, that maybe some
card in that file would have gotten somebody in trouble, and he had to
croak Rivers to get it, and then burned the rest of the cards for a
cover-up?"

"That's the way it looks to me," Rand agreed. "Just because I can't think
of any other possibility, though, doesn't mean that there aren't any
others."

"Hey! You think he might have been selling modern arms to criminals,
without reporting the sale?" McKenna asked.

"I wouldn't put it past him," Rand considered. "There was very little
that I would put past that fellow. But I wouldn't think he'd be stupid
enough to carry a record of such sales in his own file, though."

McKenna rubbed the butt of his .38 reflectively; that seemed to be his
substitute for head-scratching, as an aid to cerebration.

"You said you were here yesterday, and bought a pistol," he began. "All
right; I know about that collection of yours. But why were you back here
bright and early this morning? You working on Rivers for somebody? If so,
give."

Rand told him what he was working on. "Rivers wants to buy the Fleming
collection. That was the reason I saw him yesterday. But the reason I
came here, this morning, is that I find that somebody has stolen about
two dozen of the best pistols out of the collection since Fleming's
death, and tried to cover up by replacing them with some junk that Lane
Fleming wouldn't have allowed inside his house. For my money, it's the
butler. Now that Fleming's dead, he's the only one in the house who knows
enough about arms to know what was worth stealing. He has constant access
to the gunroom. I caught him in a lie about a book Fleming kept a record
of his collection in, and now the book has vanished. And furthermore, and
most important, if he'd been on the level, he would have spotted what was
going on, long ago, and squawked about it."

"That's a damn good circumstantial case, Jeff," McKenna nodded. "Nothing
you could take to a jury, of course, but mighty good grounds for
suspicion.... You think Rivers could have been the fence?"

"He could have been. Whoever was higrading the collection had to have an
outlet for his stuff, and he had to have a source of supply for the junk
he was infiltrating into the collection as replacements. A crooked dealer
is the answer to both, and Arnold Rivers was definitely crooked."

"You know that?" McKenna inquired. "For sure?"

Another flash lit the front of the shop. Rand nodded.

"For damn good and sure. I can show you half a dozen firearms in this
shop that have been altered to increase their value. I don't mean
legitimate restorations; I mean fraudulent alterations." He went on to
tell McKenna about Rivers's expulsion from membership in the National
Rifle Association. "And I know that he sold a pair of pistols to Lane
Fleming, about a week before Fleming was killed, that were outright
fakes. Fleming was going to sue the ears off Rivers about that; the fact
is, until this morning, I'd been wondering if that mightn't have been
why Fleming had that sour-looking accident. If he'd lived, he'd have run
Rivers out of business."

"Hell, I didn't know that!" McKenna seemed worried. "Fleming used to
target-shoot with our gang, and he knew too much about gats to pull a
Russ Columbo on himself. I didn't like that accident, at the time, but I
figured he'd pulled the Dutch, and the family were making out it was an
accident. We never were called in; the whole thing was handled through
the coroner's office. You really think Fleming could have been bumped?"

"Yes. I think he could have been bumped," Rand understated. "I haven't
found any positive proof, but--" He told McKenna about his purchase, from
Rivers, of the revolver that had been later identified as the one brought
home by Fleming on the day of his death. "I still don't know how Rivers
got hold of it," he continued. "Until I walked in here not half an hour
ago and found Rivers dead on the floor, I'd had a suspicion that Rivers
might have sneaked into the Fleming house, shot Fleming with another
revolver, left it in Fleming's hand and carried away the one Fleming had
been working on. The motive, of course, would have been to stop a lawsuit
that would have put Rivers out of business and, not inconceivably, in
jail. But now ..." He looked toward the front of the shop, where another
photo-flash glared for an instant. "And don't suggest that Rivers got
conscience-stricken and killed himself. Aside from the technical
difficulties of pinning himself to the floor after he was dead, that
explanation's out. Rivers had no conscience to be stricken with."

"Well, let's skip Fleming, for a minute," McKenna suggested. "You think
this butler, at the Fleming place, was robbing the collection. And you
say he could've sold the stuff he stole to Rivers. Well, when the family
gets you in to work on the collection, Jeeves, or whatever his name is,
realizes that you're going to spot what's been going on, and will
probably suspect him. He knows you're no ordinary arms-expert; you're an
agency dick. So he gets scared. If you catch up with Rivers, Rivers'll
talk. So he comes over here, last night, and kills Rivers off before you
can get to him. And while Rivers may not keep a record of the stuff he
got from Jeeves, or whatever his name is--"

"Walters," Rand supplied.

"Walters, then. While he may not keep a record of what he bought from
Walters, the chances are he does keep a record of the stuff Walters got
from him, to use for replacements, so the card-file goes into the fire.
How's that?"

The flare of another flash-bulb made distorted shadows dance over the
walls.

"That would hang together, now," Rand agreed. "Of course, I haven't found
anything here, except the revolver I bought yesterday, that came from the
Fleming place, but I'll add this: As soon as Rivers found out I was
working for the Fleming family, he tried to get that revolver back from
me. Offered me seventy-five dollars' worth of credit on anything else in
the shop if I'd give it back to him, not twenty minutes after I'd paid
him sixty for it."

"See!" McKenna pounced. "Look; suppose you had a lot of hot stuff, in a
place like this. You might take a chance on selling something that had
gotten mixed in with your legitimate stuff, but would you want to sell
it right back to where it had been stolen from?"

"No, I wouldn't. And if I were a butler who'd been robbing a valuable
collection, and an agency man moved in and started poking around, I might
get in a panic and do something extreme. That all hangs together, too."

While Rand was talking to McKenna, Private Jameson wandered back through
the shop.

"Hey, Sarge, is there any way into the house from here?" he asked. "The
outside doors are all locked, and I can't raise anybody."

Rand pointed out the flight of steps beside the fireplace. "I saw Rivers
come out of the house that way, yesterday," he said.

The State Policeman went up the steps and tried the door; it opened, and
he went through.

"Chances are Mrs. Rivers is away," McKenna said. "She's away a lot. They
have a colored girl who comes in by the day, but she doesn't generally
get here before noon. And the clerk doesn't get here till about the same
time."

"You seem to know a lot about this household," Rand said.

"Yeah. We have this place marked up as a bad burglary- and stick-up
hazard; we keep an eye on it. Rivers has all these guns, he does a big
cash business, he always has a couple of hundred to a thousand on
him--it's a wonder somebody hasn't made a try at this place long
ago.... Tell you what, Jeff; say you check up on this butler at the
Fleming place for us, and we'll check up here and see if we can find any
of the stuff that was stolen. We can get together and compare notes.
Maybe one or another of us may run across something about that accident
of Fleming's, too."

"Suits me. I'll be glad to help you, and I'll be glad for any help you
can give me on recovering those pistols. I haven't made any formal report
on that, yet, because I'm not sure exactly what's missing, and I don't
want any of that kind of publicity while I'm trying to sell the
collection. It may be that the two matters are related; there are some
points of similarity, which may or may not mean anything. And, of course,
I just may find somebody who'll make it worth my time to get interested
in this killing, while I'm at it."

McKenna chuckled. "That must hurt hell out of you, Jeff," he said. "A
nice classy murder like this, and nobody to pay you to work on it."

"It does," Rand admitted. "I feel like an undertaker watching a man being
swallowed by a shark."

"You want to stick around till this clerk of Rivers's gets here?" McKenna
asked. "He should be here in about an hour and a half."

"No. I'd just as soon not be seen taking too much of an interest in this
right now. Fact is, I'd just as soon not have my name mentioned at all in
connection with this. You can charge the discovery of the body up to our
old friend, Anonymous Tip, can't you?"

"Sure." McKenna accompanied Rand to the front door, past the white
chalked outline that marked the original position of the body. The body
itself, with ink-blackened fingertips, lay to one side, out of the way.
Corporal Kavaalen was going through the dead man's pockets, and Skinner
was working on the rifle with an insufflator.

"Well, we can't say it was robbery, anyhow," Kavaalen said. "He had eight
C's in his billfold."

"Migawd, Sarge, is this damn rifle ever lousy with prints," Skinner
complained. "A lot of Rivers's, and everybody else's who's been fooling
with it around here, and half the _Wehrmacht_."

"Swell, swell!" McKenna enthused. "Maybe we can pass the case off on the
War Crimes Commission."




CHAPTER 11


Mick McKenna had put his finger right on the sore spot. It did hurt
Rand like hell; a nice, sensational murder and no money in it for the
Tri-State Agency. Obviously, somebody would have to be persuaded to
finance an investigation. Preferably some innocent victim of unjust
suspicion; somebody who could best clear himself by unmasking the real
villain.... For "villain," Rand mentally substituted "public benefactor."

He was running over a list of possible suspects as he entered Rosemont.
Passing the little antique shop he slowed, backed, read the name "Karen
Lawrence" on the window, and then pulled over to the curb and got out.
Crossing the sidewalk, he went up the steps to the door, entering to the
jangling of a spring-mounted cowbell.

The girl dealer was inside, with a visitor, a sallow-faced,
untidy-looking man of indeterminate age who was opening
newspaper-wrapped packages on a table-top. Karen greeted Rand by name and
military rank; Rand told her he'd just look around till she was through.
She tossed him a look of comic reproach, as though she had counted on him
to rid her of the man with the packages.

"Now, just you look at this-here, Miss Lawrence," the man was enthusing,
undoing another package. "Here's something I know you'll want; I think
this-here is real quaint! Just look, now!" He displayed some long,
narrow, dark object, holding it out to her. "Ain't this-here an
interestin' item, now, Miss Lawrence?"

"_Ooooooh!_ What in heaven's name is that thing?" she demanded.

"That-there's a sword. A real African native sword. Look at that
scabbard, now; made out of real crocodile-skin. A whole young crocodile,
head, feet, an' all. I tell you, Miss Lawrence, that-there item is
unique!"

"It's revolting! It's the most repulsive object that's ever been brought
into this shop, which is saying quite a lot. Colonel Rand! If you don't
have a hangover this morning, will you please come here and look at this
thing?"

Rand laid down the Merril carbine he had been examining and walked over
beside Karen. The man--whom Rand judged to be some rural free-lance
antique-prospector--extended the object of the girl's repugnance. It was
an African sword, all right, with a plain iron hilt and cross-guard. The
design looked Berber, but the workmanship was low-grade, and probably
attributable to some even more barbarous people. The scabbard was what
was really surprising, if you liked that kind of surprises. It was an
infant crocodile, rather indifferently smoke-cured; the sword simply went
in between the creature's jaws and extended the length of the body and
into the tail. Either end of a moldy-green leather thong had been
fastened to the two front paws for a shoulder-baldric. When new, Rand
thought, it must have given its wearer a really distinctive aroma, even
for Africa. He drew the blade gingerly, looked at it, and sheathed it
with caution.

"East African; Danakil, or Somali, or something like that," he commented.
"Be damn good and careful not to scratch yourself on that; if you do,
you'll need about a gallon of anti-tetanus shots."

"Y'think it might be poisoned?" the man with the dirty neck and the
month-old haircut inquired eagerly. "See, Miss Lawrence? What I told you;
a real African native sword. I got that-there from Hen Sourbaw, over at
Feltonville; his uncle, the Reverend Sourbaw, that used to preach at
Hemlock Gap Church, brung it from Africa, himself, about fifty years ago.
He used to be a missionary, in his younger days.... I can make you an
awful good price on that-there item, Miss Lawrence."

"God forbid!" she exclaimed. "All my customers are heavy drinkers; I
wouldn't want to answer for what might happen if some of them saw that
thing, suddenly."

"Oh, well.... How about that-there little amethyst bottle, then?"

"Well ... I would give you seven dollars for that," she grudged.

"Y'would? Well, it's yours, then. An' how about them-there salt-cellars,
an' that-there knife-box?"

Rand wandered back to examining firearms. Eventually, after buying the
knife-box, Karen got rid of the man with the antiques. When he had gone,
she found a pack of cigarettes, offered it to Rand and lit one for
herself.

"Well, now you see why girls leave home and start antique shops," she
said. "Never a dull moment.... Wasn't that sword the awfullest thing you
ever saw, though?"

"Well, one of the ten awfullest," Rand conceded. "I just stopped in to
give you some good news. You won't need to consider that offer of Arnold
Rivers's, any more. He is no longer interested in the Fleming
collection."

"He isn't?" An eager, happy light danced up in her eyes. "You saw him
again this morning? What did he say?"

"He didn't say anything. He isn't talking any more, either. Fact is, he
isn't even breathing any more."

"He.... You mean he's dead?" She was surprised, even shocked. The shock
was probably a concession to good taste, but the surprise looked genuine.
"When did he die? It must have been very sudden; I saw him a few days
ago, and he looked all right. Of course, he's been having trouble with
his lungs, but--"

"It was very sudden. Some time last night, some person or persons unknown
gave him a butt-and-bayonet job with a German Mauser out of a rack in his
shop. A most unpleasantly thorough job. I went to see him this morning,
hoping to badger something out of him about those pistols that are
missing from the Fleming collection, and found the body. I notified the
State Police, and just came from there."

"For God's sake!" The shock was genuine, too, now. "Have the police any
idea--?"

"Not the foggiest. If some of the Fleming pistols turn up at his place,
I might think that had something to do with it. So far, though, they
haven't. I gave the shop a once-over-lightly before the cops arrived, and
couldn't find anything."

She tried to take a puff from her cigarette and found that she had broken
it in her fingers. She lit a new one from the mangled butt.

"When did it happen?" She tried to make the question sound casual.

"That I couldn't say, either. Around midnight, would be my guess. They
might be able to fix a no-earlier time." An idea occurred to him, and he
smiled.

"But that's dreadful!" She really meant that. "It's a terrible thing to
happen to anybody, being killed like that." She stopped just short of
adding: "even Rivers." Instead, she continued: "But I can't say I'm
really very sorry he's dead, Colonel."

"Outside of maybe his wife, and the gunsmith who made his fake Walker
Colts and North & Cheney flintlocks, who is?" he countered. "Oh, yes;
Cecil Gillis. He's about due for induction into the Army of the
Unemployed, unless Mrs. Rivers intends carrying on the business."

Karen's eyes widened. "Cecil Gillis!" she exclaimed softly. "I wonder,
now, if he has an alibi for last night!"

"Think he might need one?" Rand asked. "Of course I only saw him once,
but he didn't strike me as a possible candidate. I can't seem to see
young Gillis doing a messy job like this was, or going to all that manual
labor when he could have used something neat, like a pistol or a dagger."

"Well, Cecil isn't quite the languishing flower he looks," Karen told
him. "He does a lot of swimming, and he's one of the few people around
here who can beat me at tennis. And he has a motive. Maybe two motives."

"Such as?" Rand prompted.

"Maybe you think Cecil is a--you know--one of those boys," she
euphemized. "Well, he isn't. He takes a perfectly normal, and even
slightly wolfish, interest in the female of his species. And while Arnold
Rivers may have been a good provider from a financial standpoint, he
wasn't quite up to his wife's requirements in another important respect.
And Rivers was away a lot, on buying trips and so on, and when he was,
nobody ever saw Cecil leave the Rivers place in the evenings. At least,
that's the story; personally, I wouldn't know. Of course, where there's
smoke, there may be nothing more than somebody with a stogie, but, then,
there may be a regular conflagration."

"That would be a perfectly satisfactory motive, under some
circumstances," Rand admitted. "And the other?"

"Cecil might have been doing funny things with the books, and Rivers
might have caught him."

"That would also be a good enough motive." It would also, Rand thought,
furnish an explanation for the burning of Rivers's record-cards. "I'll
mention it to Mick McKenna; he's hard up for a good usable suspect. And
by the way, the news of this killing will be out before evening, but in
the meantime I wish you wouldn't mention it to anybody, or mention that
I was in here to tell you about it."

"I won't. I'm glad you told me, though.... Do you think there may be a
chance that we can get the collection, now?"

"I wouldn't know why not. Rivers's offer was pretty high; there aren't
many other dealers who would be able to duplicate it.... Well, don't take
any Czechoslovakian Stiegel."

He moved his car down the street to the Rosemont Inn, where he went into
the combination bar and grill and had a Bourbon-and-water at the bar.
Then he ordered lunch, and, while waiting for it, went into a phone-booth
and dialed the number of Stephen Gresham's office in New Belfast.

"I'd hoped to catch you before you left for lunch," he said, when the
lawyer answered. "There's been a new development in the Fleming
business." He had decided to follow the same line as with Karen Lawrence.
"You needn't worry about Arnold Rivers's offer, any more."

"Ha! So he backed out?"

"He was shoved out," Rand corrected. "On the sharp end of a Mauser
bayonet, sometime last night. I found the body this morning, when I went
to see him, and notified the State Police. They call it murder, but of
course, they're just prejudiced. I'd call it a nuisance-abatement
project."

"Look here, are you kidding?" Gresham demanded.

"I never kid about Those Who Have Passed On," Rand denied piously. Then
he recited the already hackneyed description of what had happened to
Rivers, with careful attention to all the gruesome details. "So I called
copper, directly. Sergeant McKenna's up a stump about it, and looking in
all directions for a suspect."

Gresham was silent for a moment, then swore softly.

"My God, Jeff! This is going to raise all kinds of hell!" He was silent
for a moment. "Look here, can you see me, at my home, about two thirty
this afternoon? I want to talk to you about this."

Rand smiled happily. This looked like what he had been angling for. Maybe
Arnold Rivers hadn't died in vain, after all.

"Why, yes; I can make it," he replied.

"Good. See you there, then."

Rand assured him that he would be on hand. When he returned to his table,
he found his lunch waiting for him. He sat down and ate with a good
appetite. After finishing, he had another drink, and sat sipping it
slowly and smoking his pipe; going over the story Gladys Fleming had told
him, and the gossip he had gotten from Carter Tipton, and the other
statements which had been made to him by different people about the death
of Lane Fleming, and the conclusions he had reached about the theft of
the pistols, and the killing of Arnold Rivers; sorting out the inferences
from the descriptions, and the descriptive statements of others from the
things he himself had observed. When his glass was empty and his pipe
burned out, he left a tip beside the ashtray, paid his check and went
out.

He had two hours until his meeting with Stephen Gresham; he knew exactly
where to spend them. The county seat was a normal twenty minutes' drive
from Rosemont, but with the road relatively free from traffic he was able
to cut that to fifteen. Parking his car in front of the courthouse, he
went inside.

The coroner, one Jason Kirchner, was an inoffensive-looking little fellow
with a Caspar Milquetoast mustache and an underslung jaw. He wore an Elks
watchcharm, an Odd Fellows ring, and a Knights of Pythias lapel-pin. He
looked at Rand's credentials, including the letter Humphrey Goode had
given him, with some bewilderment.

"You're working for Mr. Goode?" he asked, rather needlessly. "Yes, I see;
handling the sale of Mr. Fleming's pistols, for the estate. Yes. That
must be interesting work, Mr. Rand. Now, what can I do for you?"

"Why, I understand you have an item from that collection, here in your
office," Rand said. "The pistol with which Mr. Fleming shot himself.
Regardless of its unpleasant associations, that pistol is a valuable
collector's item, and one of the assets of the estate. If I'm to get full
value for the collection, for the heirs, I'll have to have that, to sell
with the rest of the weapons."

"Well, now, look here, Mr. Rand," Kirchner started to argue, "that
revolver's a dangerous weapon. It's killed one man, already. I don't know
as I ought to let it get out, where it might kill somebody else."

Rand estimated that this situation called for a modified version of his
hard-boiled act.

"You think you can show cause why that revolver shouldn't be turned
over to the Fleming estate?" he demanded. "Well, if I don't get it,
right away, Mr. Goode will get a court order for it. You had no right
to impound that revolver, in the first place; you removed it from the
Fleming home illegally in the second place, since you had no intention
of holding any formal inquest, and you're holding it illegally now. A
court order might not be all we could get, either," he added menacingly.
"Now, if you have any reason to suspect that Mr. Fleming committed
suicide ... or was murdered, for instance ..."

"Oh, my heavens, no!" Kirchner cried, horrified. "It was an accident,
pure and simple; I so certified it. Death by accident, due to
inadvertence of the deceased."

"Well, then," Rand said, "you have no right to hold that revolver, and
I want it, right now. As Mr. Goode's agent, I'm responsible for that
collection, of which the revolver you're holding is a part. That revolver
is too valuable an asset to ignore. You certainly realize that."

"Well, I don't have any intention of exceeding my authority, of course,"
Kirchner disclaimed hastily. "And I certainly wouldn't want to go against
Mr. Goode's wishes." Humphrey Goode must pull considerable weight around
the courthouse, Rand surmised. "But you realize, that revolver's still
loaded...."

"Oh, that's not your worry. I'll draw the charges, or, better, fire them
out. It stood one shot, it can stand the other five."

"Well, would you mind if I called Mr. Goode on the phone?"

Rand did, decidedly. However, he shook his head negligently.

"Certainly not; go ahead and call him, by all means."

The coroner went away. In a few minutes he was back, carrying a
revolver in both hands. Evidently Goode had given him the green light.
He approached, handling the weapon with a caution that would have been
excessive for a Mills grenade; after warning Rand again that it was
loaded, he laid it gently on his desk.

It was a .36 Colt, one of the 1860 series, with the round barrel and the
so-called "creeping" ramming-lever. Somebody had wound a piece of wire
around it, back of the hammer and through the loading-aperture in front
of the cylinder; as the hammer was down on a fired chamber, there was no
way in God's world, short of throwing the thing into a furnace, in which
it could be discharged, but Kirchner was shrinking away from it as though
it might jump at his throat.

"I put the wire on," the coroner said. "I thought it might be safer that
way."

"It'll be a lot safer after I've emptied it into the first claybank,
outside town," Rand told him. "Sorry I had to be a little short with you,
Mr. Kirchner, but you know how it is. I'm responsible to Mr. Goode for
the collection, and this gun's part of it."

"Oh, that's all right; I really shouldn't have taken the attitude I did,"
Kirchner met him halfway. "After I talked to Mr. Goode, of course, I knew
it was all right, but ... You see, I've been bothered a lot about that
pistol, lately."

"Yes?" Rand succeeded in being negligent about it.

"Oh my, yes! The newspaper people wanted to take pictures of me holding
it, and then, there was an antique-dealer who was here trying to buy it."

"Who was that--Arnold Rivers?"

"Why yes! Do you know him? He has an antique-shop on the other side of
Rosemont; he doesn't sell anything but guns and swords and that sort of
thing," Kirchner said. "He was here, making inquiries about it, and my
clerk showed it to him, and then he started making offers for it--first
ten dollars, and then fifteen, and then twenty; he got up as high as
sixty dollars. I suppose it's worth a couple of hundred."

It was probably worth about thirty-five. Rand was intrigued by this
second instance of an un-Rivers-like willingness to spare no expense to
get possession of a .36-caliber percussion revolver.

"Did he have it in his hands?" he asked.

"Oh, yes; he looked it over carefully. I suppose he thought he could get
a lot of money for it, because of the accident, and Mr. Fleming being
such a prominent man," Kirchner suggested.

Rand allowed himself to be struck by an idea.

"Say, you know, that _would_ make it worth more, at that!" he exclaimed.
"What do you know! I never thought of that.... Look, Mr. Kirchner; I'm
supposed to get as much money for these pistols, for the heirs, as I can.
How would you like to give me a letter, vouching for this as the pistol
Mr. Fleming killed himself with? Put in how you found it in his hand, and
mention the serial numbers, so that whoever buys it will know it's the
same revolver." He picked up the Colt and showed Kirchner the serials, on
the butt, and in front of the trigger-guard. "See, here it is: 2444."

Kirchner would be more than willing to oblige Mr. Goode's agent; he typed
out the letter himself, looked twice at the revolver to make sure of the
number, took Rand's word for the make, model, and caliber, signed it, and
even slammed his seal down on it. Rand thanked him profusely, put the
letter in his pocket, and stuck the Colt down his pants-leg.

About two miles from the county seat Rand stopped his car on a deserted
stretch of road and got out. Unwinding the wire Kirchner had wrapped
around the revolver, he picked up an empty beer-can from the ditch,
set it against an embankment, stepped back about thirty feet and began
firing. The first shot kicked up dirt a little over the can--Rand never
could be sure just how high any percussion Colt was sighted--and the
other four hit the can. He carried the revolver back to the car and put
it into the glove-box with the Leech & Rigdon.

After starting the car, he snapped on the radio, in time for the two
fifteen news-broadcast from the New Belfast station. As he had expected,
the murder was out; the daily budget of strikes and Congressional
investigations and international turmoil was enlivened by a more or less
imaginative account of what had already been christened the "Rosemont
Bayonet Murder." Rand resigned himself to the inevitable influx of
reporters. Then he swore, as the newscaster continued:

"District Attorney Charles P. Farnsworth, of Scott County, who has taken
charge of the investigation, says, and we quote: 'There is strong
evidence implicating certain prominent persons, whom we are not, as yet,
prepared to name, and if the investigation, now under way and making
excellent progress, justifies, they will be apprehended and formally
charged. No effort will be spared, and no consideration of personal
prominence will be allowed to deter us from clearing up this dastardly
crime....'"

Rand swore again, with weary bitterness, wondering how much trouble he
was going to have with District Attorney Charles P. Farnsworth, as he
pulled to a stop in Stephen Gresham's driveway.




CHAPTER 12


Gresham must have been waiting inside the door; as soon as Rand came up
onto the porch, he opened it, and motioned the detective inside. Beyond a
hasty greeting as Rand passed the threshold, he did not speak until they
were seated in the gunroom upstairs. Then he came straight to the point.

"Jeff, can you spare the time from this work you're doing at the
Flemings' to investigate this Rivers business?" he asked. "And how much
would an investigation cost me? It's got to be a blitz job. I'm not
interested in getting anybody convicted in court; I just want the case
cleared up in a hurry."

"Well--" Rand puffed at the cigar Gresham had given him, watching the ash
form on the end. "I don't work by the day, Stephen. I take a lump-sum
fee, and, of course, it's to my interest to get a case cleared up as soon
as I can. But I can't set any time limit on a job like this. This Rivers
killing has more angles than _Nude Descending a Staircase_; I don't know
how much work I'll have to do, or even what kind."

"Well, it'll have to be fast," Gresham told him urgently. "Look. I didn't
kill Arnold Rivers. I hated his guts, and I think whoever did it ought to
get a medal and a testimonial dinner, but I did not kill him. You believe
me?"

"I'm inclined to," Rand replied. "In your law practice, you know what a
lying client is letting himself in for. As my client, you wouldn't lie to
me. You seem to think you may be suspected of purging Rivers. But why? Is
there any reason, aside from that homemade North & Cheney he sold you,
why anybody would think you'd killed him?"

"Great God, yes!" Gresham exclaimed. "Now look. I'm not worried about
being railroaded for this. I didn't do it, and I can beat any case that
half-assed ex-ambulance-chaser, Farnsworth, could dream up against me.
But I can't afford even to be mentioned in connection with this. You know
what that would do to me, in town. I just can't get mixed up in this, at
all. I want you to see to it that I don't."

"That sounds like a large order." The ash was growing on Rand's cigar;
he took another heavy drag at it. "But why necessarily you? Rivers had
plenty of other enemies."

"Yes, but, dammit, they weren't all in his shop, last evening. Just me.
And one other. The one who killed him."

"On your way out from town?" Rand inquired.

"Yes. I stopped at his place, about a quarter to nine. I was sore as hell
about the hooking he gave me on that North & Cheney, falsely so-called,
and I decided to stop and have it out with him. We had words, most of
them unpleasant. I told him, for one thing, that Lane Fleming's death
hadn't pulled his bacon off the fire, that I was going to start the same
sort of action against him on my own account. But that isn't the point.
The point is that when I was going in, this la-de-da clerk of his, Cecil
Gillis, was coming out. He got into his car and drove away, leaving me
alone with Rivers. He'll be the first one the police talk to, and he'll
tell them all about it."

"That does put you back of the eight ball." Rand dropped the ash into a
tray and looked at it curiously. It looked like the sort of ash he had
seen at Rivers's shop, but he couldn't be sure. "But if it can be proved
that Rivers was alive after nine twenty, when you got here, you'll be in
the clear."

"I don't want to have to clear myself," Gresham insisted. "I don't want
anything to do with it, at all. Here; I'll pay you a thousand down, and
two more when you have the case completed; I want you to get the murder
cleared up before I can be publicly involved in it. I say publicly,
because this damned Gillis has probably involved me with the police
already."

"Well, Gillis isn't exactly in a state of pure sanctity, himself," Rand
commented. "As a suspect, the smart handicappers are figuring him to run
well inside the money. For instance, you know, there have been stories
about him and Mrs. Rivers."

Gresham snapped his fingers. "Damned if there haven't, now!" he said.
"You talk to Adam Trehearne. He did business with Rivers--there wasn't
much in his line Rivers and Umholtz were able to fake--and different
times he's gone to Rivers's shop and there'd be nobody around, and then
Gillis would come in from the house, smelling of Chanel Number Five.
Mrs. Rivers uses Chanel Number Five. Maybe you have something there.
If Cecil thought he could marry the business, with Rivers out of the
way.... You'll take the case, won't you, Jeff?"

"Oh, certainly," Rand assured him. "Now, all they have on you is that
there was ill-feeling between you and Rivers about that fake North &
Cheney, and that you were in Rivers's shop yesterday evening?"

Rand's new client grimaced. "I wish that were all!" he said. "The worst
part of it is the way Rivers was killed. See, back in Kaiser Willie's
war, before I was assigned a company of my own, I was regimental
bayonet-instruction officer. And after we got to France, I always
carried a rifle and bayonet at the front; hell, I must have killed
close to a dozen Krauts just the way Rivers was killed. And during
Schicklgruber's war, I volunteered as bayonet instructor for the local
Home Guard."

"My God!" Rand made a wry face. "There must be close to a hundred people
around here who'd know that, and all of them are probably convinced that
you killed Rivers, and are expressing that opinion at the top of their
voices to all comers. You don't want a detective, you want a magician!"
He took another drag at the cigar, and blew smoke through a circular
gun-rack beside him. "What sort of a character is this Farnsworth,
anyhow?" he asked. "Before the war, I had all the D.A.'s in the state
typed and estimated, but since I got back--"

Gresham slandered the county prosecutor's legitimacy. "God-damn
headline-hunting little egotist! He's running for re-election this
year, too."

"One way, that could be bad. On the other hand, it might be easy to throw
a scare into him.... Stephen, when you were at Rivers's, were you smoking
a cigar?"

Gresham shook his head. "No. I threw my cigar away when I got out of the
car, and I didn't light another one till I got home. If you remember, I
was lighting it when I came in here."

"Yes; so you were. Well, I don't suppose, in view of the state of
relations between you and Rivers, that you had a drink with him, either?"

"I wouldn't drink that guy's liquor if I were dying of snakebite, and he
wouldn't offer me a drink if he knew I was," Gresham declared.

"Well, did you notice, back near the fireplace, a low table with a fifth
of Haig & Haig Pinchbottle, and a couple of glasses, and a siphon, and so
on, on it?"

"I saw the table. There was an ashtray on it, and a book--I think it was
Gluckman's _United States Martial Pistols and Revolvers_--but no bottle,
or siphon, or glasses."

"All right, then; it was the killer." Rand explained about the drinks,
and the cigar-ashes. He went on to tell about the destruction of Rivers's
record-cards.

"I don't get that." Gresham was puzzled. "Unless it was young Gillis,
after all. He could have been knocking down on Rivers, and Rivers caught
him at it."

"I'd thought of that," Rand admitted. "But I doubt if Rivers would sit
down and drink with him, while accusing him of theft. And I can't seem to
find anything around Rivers's place that looks as though it might have
been stolen from the Fleming collection, either.... Oh, and that reminds
me: If you have time this afternoon, I wonder if you'd come along with me
to the Flemings' and see just what's missing. I'll have to know that, in
any case, and there's a good possibility that the thefts from the
collection and the killing of Rivers are related."

"Yes, of course," Gresham agreed. "And suppose we take Pierre Jarrett
along with us. He knows that collection as well as I do; he'll spot
anything I miss. He works at home; I'll call him now. We can pick him up
before we go to the Flemings'."

They went into Gresham's bedroom, where there was a phone, and Gresham
talked to Pierre Jarrett. It was arranged that he should pick Jarrett up
with his car and come to the Flemings', while Rand went there directly.

Then Rand used the phone to call his office in New Belfast. He talked to
Dave Ritter, explaining the situation to date.

"I'm going to need some help," he continued. "I want you to come here and
get a room at the Rosemont Inn, under your own name. I'll see you there
about five thirty. And bring with you a suit of butler's livery, or
reasonable facsimile. I believe there will be a vacancy in the Fleming
household tomorrow or the next day, and I want you ready to take over.
And bring a small gun with you; something you can wear under said livery.
That .357 Colt of yours is a little too conspicuous. You'll find a .380
Beretta in the top right-hand drawer of my office desk, with a box of
ammunition and a couple of spare clips."

"Right. I'll be at Rosemont Inn at five thirty," Ritter promised. "And
say, Tip was in, this morning, with a lot of dope on the Fleming estate.
Want me to let you have it now, or shall I give it to you when I see
you?"

"You have notes? Bring them along; I'll be seeing you in a couple of
hours."

He parted from Gresham, going out and getting in his car. As Gresham got
his own car out of the garage and drove off toward Pierre Jarrett's
house, Rand started in the opposite direction, toward Rosemont.

About a half-mile from Gresham's he caught an advancing gleam of white on
the highway ahead of him and pulled to the side of the road, waiting
until the State Police car drew up and stopped. In it were Mick McKenna,
Aarvo Kavaalen, and a third man, a Nordic type, in an untidy brown suit.

"Hi, Jeff," McKenna greeted him, as Rand got out of his car and came
across the road. "This is Gus Olsen, investigator for the D.A.'s office.
Jeff Rand; Tri-State Agency," he introduced.

"Hey!" Olsen yelled. "We been lookin' for you! Where you been?"

Rand raised an eyebrow at McKenna.

"You just came from where we're going," the State Police sergeant
surmised. "Was Gresham at home?"

"He was; he's gone now," Rand said. "He and another man are going to help
me check up on what's missing from the Fleming collection."

"Hey!" Olsen exploded. "What I told you, now; he run ahead of us with a
tip-off! Gresham's skipped out, now!"

"What is all this?" Rand wanted to know. "What's he screaming about,
Mick?"

"Like he don't know!" Olsen vociferated. "He tipped off Gresham so's he
could skip out; I'll bet he's in it with Gresham!"

"Pay no attention," McKenna advised. "He doesn't know what the score is;
hell, he doesn't even know what teams are playing."

"Now you look here!" Olsen bawled. "We'll see what Mr. Farnsworth has to
say about this. You're supposed to cooperate with us, not go fraternizin'
with a lot of suspects. Why, it's plain as anything; him and Gresham's
in it together. I bet that was why he come around, the first thing in the
morning, to find the body!"

Kavaalen, behind the wheel, turned around and began jabbering at Olsen,
in the back seat, in something that sounded like Swedish. Most Finns
can speak Swedish, and Rand was wishing he could understand it. The
corporal's remarks ran to about a paragraph, and must have been downright
incendiary. At least, Olsen seemed to catch fire from them. He rose in
his seat, waving his arms and howling back in the same language.

"Shut up, goddammit, _shut up_!" McKenna bellowed into his face. "Shut up
before I sling your ass to hell out of this car! I'm talking, and I don't
want any goddam jaw from you, Olsen. You either," he barked at Kavaalen,
winking at him at the same time.

Silence fell with a heavy thump in the car.

"Well, now that the international crisis seems to have been averted,
how's about letting me in on it, too?" Rand asked. "For instance, what
about Gresham? What's he supposed to be a suspect for?"

"Ah, Olsen suspects him of chopping Rivers up," McKenna replied wearily.
"See, we questioned this Cecil Gillis, and he told us that last evening,
as he was leaving Rivers's, he saw Stephen Gresham drive up and go into
the shop. I wanted to talk to him, myself; I thought he might account for
the cigar-ashes, and the drink-fixings on that table. But when Farnsworth
heard about the killing, he sent Olsen around, and when Olsen heard that
Gresham had been there, he tried him and convicted him on the spot."

"Oh, obscenity! Is that what it's about?" Rand exclaimed in disgust.
"Yes, Gresham told me about that. He didn't have the drink, and he wasn't
smoking a cigar in the shop, and he left a little after nine. He got home
at nine twenty-two. I can testify to that, myself; I was there at the
time, and so were seven other people." Rand named them. "They dribbled
away at different times during the evening, but Philip Cabot and I stayed
till around eleven." He mentioned the approximate time at which the
others had left. "What time was Rivers killed, or hasn't the time been
fixed?"

"The M.E. says around ten to two," McKenna said.

"He could be wrong; them guys only guess, half the time," Olsen argued.
"And besides, Gresham had it in for Rivers. And that ain't all, neither;
he knew how to use a bayonet, too. I seen him, myself, during the war,
showin' the Home Guard how to do it, just the way Rivers was killed!" he
produced triumphantly.

McKenna used a dirty word. "So what? Anybody who's ever had infantry
training knows that butt-stroke-and-lunge," he retorted. "I learned it
myself, when I was a kid, in '24 and '25, in C.M.T.C. Hell, anybody who's
ever seen a war-movie.... If you hadn't lammed out of Sweden when you
were sixteen, to duck conscription, you'd of known it, too."

"Well, maybe Olsen, or his boss, can explain why Gresham threw those
record-cards in the fire," Rand contributed. "You know why Olsen says
Gresham had it in for Rivers? Rivers sold Gresham a fake antique, a flint
lock navy pistol that had been worked over into something else. Gresham
was going to subpoena those records, when he brought suit against
Rivers," Rand lied. "But I can explain why Cecil Gillis might have
destroyed them, after killing Rivers, if he'd been cheating Rivers and
Rivers caught him at it."

"Yeah, and that might explain why Gillis was in such a hurry to sic us
onto Gresham, too," McKenna added. "I thought of something like that. And
this high-brown girl that works for Rivers says that Gillis and Mrs.
Rivers played all kinds of games together, when Rivers was away."

"Well, who's in charge of the investigation?" Rand wanted to know. "I
heard, on the radio ..."

"You're liable to hear anything on the radio, including slanders on
Bing Crosby's horses. But for the record, I am in charge of this
investigation. And don't anybody forget it, either," he added, in
the direction of the rear seat.

"That's what I thought. Well, Stephen Gresham has just retained me to
make an independent investigation," Rand said. "It is not that he lacks
confidence in the State Police, or in you; he was afraid that other
parties might get into the act and try to make political capital out
of it. Which appears to have happened."

"Well, if Gresham retained you, I'm satisfied," McKenna said. "You can
take care of that end of it. Glad you're in with us."

"Well, I ain't satisfied!" Olsen began yelling, again. "And Mr.
Farnsworth won't be, neither. Why, this here private dick is like as
not workin' for the very man that killed Rivers!"

McKenna turned slowly in his seat, to face Olsen.

"One time, ten years ago," he began, "Jeff Rand had a client who was
guilty of the crime he hired Jeff to investigate. It was an arson case;
this guy set fire to his own factory, and then got Jeff to run down a lot
of fake clues he'd planted. I know about that; I was on the case, myself.
That's where I first met Jeff, and he saved me from making a jackass out
of myself. And what happened to this guy who'd hired Jeff was something
that oughtn't to happen even to Molotov, and it happened because Jeff
fixed it to happen. If anybody hires Jeff Rand, he's one of two things.
He's either innocent, or else he's out of luck.... I don't know why the
hell I bother telling you this."

"Ten to two, you say," Rand considered. "Look. A couple of days ago,
Rivers put out a new price-list to his regular customers. A lot of them,
in different parts of the country, order by telephone, and some of them
live in the West, where there's a couple of hours' time-difference. One
of them, calling at, say, eight o'clock, local time, would get his call
in at ten, Eastern Standard. If you checked the long-distance calls to
Rivers's number last night, now, you might get something."

"Yeah. And if he took a call after nine twenty-two, that would let
Gresham out. Even Farnsworth could figure that out. Sure. I'll check
right away."

"Who's at Rivers's now?"

"Skinner and Jameson, of our gang. And Farnsworth, and some of his
outfit. And the hell's own slew of reporters, of course," McKenna said.
"Aarvo's going back there, in a little. We're still trying to locate Mrs.
Rivers; we haven't been able to, yet. The maid says she went to New York
day before yesterday."

"I'll probably be around at Rivers's, later in the day. I want to check
on that Fleming angle."

"Uh-huh; I'll be there, in half an hour," Corporal Kavaalen said. "Be
seeing you."

They exchanged so-longs, and Kavaalen backed, and made a U-turn, moving
off in the direction of Rosemont. Olsen's voluble protests drifted back
as the car receded. Rand returned to his own car and followed.




CHAPTER 13


Rand found Gladys alone in the library. As she rose to greet him, he came
close to her, gesturing for silence with finger on lips.

"There's a perfect hell of a mess," he whispered. "Somebody murdered
Arnold Rivers last night."

She looked at him in horror. "Murdered? Who was it? How did it...?"

"I haven't time to talk about that right now," he told her. "Stephen
Gresham and Pierre Jarrett are on their way here, and I'd like you to
keep the servants, and particularly Walters, out of earshot of the
gunroom while they're here. It seems that a number of the best pistols
have been stolen from the collection, sometime between the death of Mr.
Fleming and the time I saw the collection yesterday. Stephen and Pierre
are going to help me find out just what's been taken. I have an idea they
might have been sold to Rivers. That may have been why he was killed--to
prevent him from implicating the thief."

"You think somebody here--the servants?" she asked.

"I can't see how it could have been an outsider. The stuff wasn't all
taken at once; it must have been moved out a piece at a time, and
worthless pistols moved in and hung on the racks to replace valuable
pistols taken." He had left the library door purposely open; when the
doorbell rang, he heard it. "I'll let them in," he said. "You go and head
Walters off."

Rand hurried to the front door and admitted Gresham and Pierre, hustling
them down the hall, into the library, and up the spiral to the gunroom,
while Gladys went to the foot of the front stairs. Through the open
gunroom door, Rand could hear her speaking to Walters, as though sending
him on some errand to the rear of the house. He closed the door and
turned to the others.

"We'll have to make it fast," he said. "Mrs. Fleming can't hold the
butler off all day. Let's start over here, and go around the racks."

They began at the left, with the wheel locks. Pierre put his finger
immediately on the shabby and disreputable specimen Rand had first
noticed.

"Phew! Is that one a stinker!" he said. "What used to be there was a
nice late sixteenth- or early seventeenth-century North Italian pistol,
all covered with steel filigree-work. A real beauty; much better than
average."

"Those Turkish atrocities," Gresham pointed out. "They're filling in for
a pair of Lazarino Cominazo snaphaunces that Lane Fleming paid seven
hundred for, back in the mid-thirties, and didn't pay a cent too much
for, even then. Worth an easy thousand, now. Remember the pair of
Cominazo flintlocks illustrated in Pollard's _Short History of Firearms_?
These were even better, and snaphaunces."

"Well, you go over the collection," Rand told them. "Note down anything
you find missing." He handed them a pad of paper and a pencil from the
desk. "I have something else to do, for a few minutes."

With that he left them scrutinizing the pistols on the wall, and went to
the workbench in the corner, drawing the .36 Colt from under his
waistband. Working rapidly, he dismounted it, taking off the barrel and
cylinder, and cleaned it thoroughly before putting it together again.
Pierre and Gresham had just started on the Colts when he slipped the
revolver out of sight and rejoined them.

It took over a half-hour to finish; when they had gotten completely
around the collection, Rand had a list of twenty-six missing items,
including four cased sets. At a conservative estimate, the missing
pistols were worth ten to twelve thousand dollars, dealer's list value;
the stuff that had been moved in to replace them might have a value of
two or three hundred, but no serious collector would buy any of it at any
price. There had been no attempt to replace the cased items; the cases
had been merely rearranged on the table to avoid any conspicuous
vacancies.

"See that thing?" Pierre asked, tapping a small .25 Webley & Scott
automatic with his finger. Rand looked at it; it had been fitted with an
English-made silencer. "That thing," Pierre said, "is the one illustrated
in Pollard's book. The identical pistol; it used to be in the Pollard
collection."

"Lane had a lot of stuff from some famous collections," Gresham said.
"Pollard collection, Sawyer collection, Fred Hines collection, Meeks
collection, even the old Mark Field collection, that was sold at Libbie
Galleries in 1911. His own could rank with any of them. Think you can get
any of this stuff back?"

"I hope so. By the way, where does this fellow Umholtz, the fabricator of
spurious Whitneyville Walker Colts, hang out? I believe he ought to be
looked into."

"Say, that's an idea!" Pierre ejaculated. "He might have bought the
pistols, instead of Rivers. Why, he has a gunshop at Kingsville, on Route
22, about fifteen miles west of here, just this side of the village. He
had a big sign along the road, and his shop's in the barn, behind the
house."

"I'll have to check up on him. But first, I want to see if any of this
stuff's at Rivers's shop. I won't ask you to come along," he told
Gresham. "No use you sticking your head into the lion's mouth. I've
talked the State Police temporarily off your trail, but I still have
Farnsworth to worry about."

"He'd like to prosecute a big corporation lawyer, if he thought he had
any chance of getting a conviction," Pierre said. "Make a nice impression
on the proletarian vote in the south end of the county."

"You're a member of the Mohawk Club in New Belfast, aren't you?" Rand
asked Gresham. "Well, go there and stay there for a couple of days, till
the heat's off. Pierre, you can come with me to Rivers's; I'll run you
home in my car when we're through."

Gresham let himself out the front door; Pierre and Rand went out through
the garage and got into Rand's car.

"You have any idea, so far, about who could have killed Rivers?" the
ex-Marine asked, as they coasted down the drive to the highway.

"I haven't even the start of an idea," Rand said. He ran briefly over
what he knew, or at least those items which were likely to become public
knowledge soon. "From what I've observed at the shop, and from what I
know of Rivers's character, I'd think that he'd been in some kind of a
crooked deal with somebody, and got double-crossed, or else the other man
caught Rivers double-crossing him. Or else, Rivers and somebody else had
some secret in common, and the other man wanted a monopoly on it and
killed Rivers as a security measure."

"Think it might be the Fleming pistols?"

"That depends. I'll have to see whether any of the Fleming pistols turn
up anywhere in Rivers's former possession. Personally, I've about decided
that the man who was drinking with Rivers killed him. There aren't any
indications that anybody else was in the shop afterward. If that's the
case, I doubt if the killer was Walters. You know what a snobbish guy
Rivers was. And from what I know of him, he seems to have had a
thoroughly Aristotelian outlook; he identified individuals with
class-labels. Walters, of course, would be identified with the label
'butler,' and I can't imagine Rivers sitting down and drinking with a
'butler.' He would only drink with people whom he thought of as his
equals, that is, people whom he identified with class-labels of equal
social importance to his own labels of 'antiquarian' and 'businessman.'"

"That sounds like Korzybski," Pierre said, as they turned onto Route 19
in the village and headed east. "You've read _Science and Sanity_?"

Rand nodded. "Yes. I first read it in the 1933 edition, back about 1936;
I've been rereading it every couple of years since. The principles of
General Semantics come in very handy in my business, especially in
criminal-investigation work, like this. A consciousness of abstracting,
a realization that we can only know something about a thin film of events
on the surface of any given situation, and a habit of thinking
structurally and of individual things, instead of verbally and of
categories, saves a lot of blind-alley chasing. And they suggest a
great many more avenues of investigation than would be evident to one
whose thinking is limited by intensional, verbal, categories."

"Yes. I find General Semantics helpful in my work, too," Pierre said. "I
can use it in plotting a story.... Oh-oh!"

"The Gentlemen of the Press," Rand said, looking ahead as the car
approached the Rivers house and shop. "There hasn't been a good,
sensational, murder story for some time; this is a gift from the gods."

A swarm of cars were parked in front and beside the red-brick house.
Among them, Rand spotted a gold-lettered green sedan of the New Belfast
_Dispatch_ and _Evening Express_, a black coupé bearing the blazonry of
the New Belfast _Mercury_, cars from a couple of papers at Louisburg, the
state capital, and cars from papers as far distant as Pittsburgh,
Buffalo, and Cincinnati. In front of the shop, a motley assemblage of
journalists was interviewing and photographing an undersized runt in
a tan Chesterfield topcoat and a gray Homburg hat, whom they were
addressing as Mr. Farnsworth. The District Attorney of Scott County had
a mustache which failed miserably to make him look like Tom Dewey; he
impressed Rand as the sort of offensive little squirt who compensates
for his general insignificance by bad manners and loud-mouthed
self-assertion. Corporal Kavaalen, standing in the doorway of the shop,
caught sight of Rand and his companion as they got out of the car and
came to meet them, hustling them around the crowd and into the shop
before anybody could notice and recognize them.

"That was a good tip, about the telephone," he said softly. "Mick checked
at the Rosemont exchange. Rivers got a long-distance call from Topeka
last night; ten fifteen to ten seventeen. We got the night long distance
operator out of bed, and she confirmed it; Rivers took the call himself.
He gets a lot of long distance calls in the evenings; she knew his
voice." He corrected himself, shifting to the past tense and glancing, as
he did, at the chalk outline on the floor, now scuffed by many feet, and
the dried bloodstains. "You say this puts Gresham in the clear?"

"Absolutely," Rand assured him. "He was at home from nine twenty-two on."
He introduced Pierre Jarrett, and explained their mission. "You find
anything except what's here in the shop?"

"Only Rivers's own .38 Smith & Wesson, in his room, and a lot of pistols
out in the garage, that look like junk to me," Kavaalen said. "I'll show
them to you."

Rand nodded. "Pierre, you look around the shop; I'll see what this other
stuff is."

He followed Kavaalen through a door at the rear of the shop; the same one
through which Cecil Gillis had carried the Kentucky rifle the afternoon
before. Beside Rivers's car, there was a long workbench in the garage,
and piles of wood and cardboard cartons, and stacks of newspapers, and
a barrel full of excelsior, all evidently used in preparing arms for
shipment. There was also a large pile of old pistols, and a number of
long-arms.

Rand pawed among the pistols; they were, as the State Police corporal had
said, all junk. The sort of things a dealer has to buy, at times, in
order to get something really good. Many of them had been partially
dismantled for parts. When he was certain that the heap of junk-weapons
didn't conceal anything of value, he returned to the shop. Pierre was
waiting for him by Rivers's desk.

He shook his head. "Not a thing," he reported. "I found a couple of
out-and-out fakes, and about ten or fifteen that had been altered in one
way or another, and a lot of reblued stuff, but nothing from Fleming's
collection. What did you find?"

Rand laughed. "I found Rivers's scrap-heap, and some pistols that
probably contributed parts to some of the stuff you found," he said. "Of
course, all we can say is that the stuff isn't here; Rivers could have
bought it, and stored it outside somewhere. But even so, I'm not taking
the Fleming butler too seriously as a suspect for the murder."

"What's this about Fleming's butler?" a voice broke in. "Have you been
withholding information from me?"

Rand turned, to find that Farnsworth had left the press conference in
front and crepe-soled up on him from behind.

"I withheld a theory, which seems to have come to nothing," he replied.

Kavaalen told the D.A. who Rand was. "He's cooperating with us," he
added. "Sergeant McKenna instructed us to give him every consideration."

"It seems that a number of valuable pistols were stolen from the
collection of the late Lane Fleming," Rand said. "We suspected that
the butler had stolen them and sold them to Rivers; I thought it
possible that he might also have killed Rivers to silence him about the
transaction." He shrugged. "None of the stolen items have turned up here,
so there's nothing to connect the thefts with the death of Rivers."

"Good heavens, you certainly didn't suspect a prominent and respected
citizen like Mr. Rivers of receiving stolen goods?" Farnsworth demanded,
aghast.

"Who respects him?" Rand hooted. "Rivers was a notorious swindler; he
had that reputation among arms-collectors all over the country. He was
expelled from membership in the National Rifle Association for
misrepresentation and fraud. Why, he even swindled Lane Fleming on a pair
of fake pistols, a week or so before Fleming's death. And the very reason
why your man Olsen was inclined to suspect Stephen Gresham was that he
had had trouble with Rivers about a crooked deal Rivers had put over on
him. Fortunately, Mr. Gresham has since been cleared of any suspicion,
but--"

"Who says he's been cleared?" Farnsworth snapped. "He's still a suspect."

"Sergeant McKenna says so," Corporal Kavaalen declared. "He has been
cleared. I guess we just didn't get around to telling you about that."
He went on to explain about the long distance call that had furnished
Stephen Gresham's alibi.

"And Gresham was at home from nine twenty-two on," Rand added. "There are
eight witnesses to that: His wife and daughter; myself; Captain Jarrett,
here; and his fiancée, Miss Lawrence; Philip Cabot; Adam Trehearne; Colin
MacBride."

Farnsworth looked bewildered. "Why wasn't I told about that?" he demanded
sulkily.

"Sergeant McKenna's been too busy, and I didn't think of it," Kavaalen
said insolently. "I'm not supposed to report to you, anyhow. Why didn't
your man Olsen tell you; he was with us when we checked with the
telephone company."

Farnsworth tried to ignore that by questioning Pierre about the time of
Gresham's arrival home, then turned to Rand and wanted to know what the
latter's interest in the case was.

Rand told him about his work in connection with the Fleming collection,
producing Humphrey Goode's letter of authorization. Farnsworth seemed
impressed in about the same way as the coroner, Kirchner, but he was
still puzzled.

"But I understood that you had been retained by Stephen Gresham, to
investigate this murder," he said.

"So you did talk to Olsen, after I saw him," Rand pounced. "Odd he didn't
mention this telephone thing.... Why, yes; that's true. My agency handles
all sorts of business. The two operations aren't mutually exclusive; for
a while, I even thought they might be related, but now--" He shrugged.

"Well, you believe, now, that Rivers had nothing to do with the pistols
you say were stolen from the Fleming collection?" Farnsworth asked. Rand
shook his head ambiguously; Farnsworth took that for a negative answer
to his question, as he was intended to. "And you say Mr. Gresham has been
completely cleared of any suspicion of complicity in this murder?"

"Mr. Rand's helping us; we want him to stick around till the case is
closed," Corporal Kavaalen threw in, perceiving the drift of Farnsworth's
questions. "He and Sergeant McKenna have worked together before; he's
given us a lot of good tips."

"You understand," Rand took over, "Mr. Gresham didn't retain me merely
to help him clear himself. I don't accept that kind of retainers. I was
retained to find the murderer of Arnold Rivers, and I intend to continue
working on this case until I do. I hope that the same friendly spirit of
mutual cooperation will exist between your office and my agency as exists
between me and the State Police. I certainly don't want to have to work
at cross purposes with any of the regular law-enforcement agencies."

"Oh, certainly; of course." Farnsworth didn't seem to like the idea, but
there was no apparent opening for objection. He and Rand exchanged
mendacious compliments, pledged close cooperation, and did practically
everything but draw up and sign a treaty of alliance. Then Farnsworth and
Corporal Kavaalen accompanied Rand and Pierre Jarrett to the front door.

Some of the reporters who were ravening outside must have spotted Rand as
he had entered; they were all waiting for him to come out, and set up a
monstrous ululation when he appeared in the doorway. With Farnsworth
beaming approval, Rand assured the Press that he was no more than a mere
spectator, that the State Police and the efficient District Attorney of
Scott County had the situation well in hand, and that an arrest was
expected within a matter of hours. Then he and Pierre hurried to his car
and drove away.




CHAPTER 14


Neither of them spoke for a moment or two. Then, after they had left the
criminological-journalistic uproar at the Rivers place behind and were
approaching the village of Rosemont, Pierre turned to Rand.

"You know," he said, "for a disciple of Korzybski, you came pretty close
to confusing orders of abstraction, a couple of times, back there. You
showed that Stephen was at home while Rivers was taking that phone call,
a little after ten. But when you talk about clearing him completely,
aren't you overlooking the possibility that he came back to Rivers's
after you and Philip Cabot left the Gresham place?"

Rand eased the foot-pressure on the gas and spared young Jarrett a
side-glance before returning his attention to the road ahead.

"Understand," Pierre hastened to add, "I don't believe that Stephen was
fool enough to kill Rivers over that fake North & Cheney, but weren't you
producing inferences that hadn't been abstracted from any descriptive
data?"

"Pierre, when I'm working on a case like this, any resemblance between
my opinions and the statements I may make is purely due to conscious
considerations of policy," Rand told him. "I don't want Farnsworth or
Mick McKenna going around bitching this operation up for me. If they
feel justified in eliminating Gresham on the strength of that phone
call, I'm satisfied, regardless of the semantics involved. Right now, the
thing that's worrying me is the ease with which I seem to have talked
Farnsworth into laying off Gresham. He and Olsen both have single-track
minds. They may just dismiss that telephone alibi, such as it is, as mere
error of the mortal mind, and go right ahead building some kind of a
ramshackle case against Gresham. Since they picked him for their entry,
they won't want to have to scratch him.... Damn, I wish I could think of
where Walters could have sold those pistols!"

"Well, if Rivers wasn't involved somehow, why was he killed?" Pierre
wondered. "Hey! Maybe Walters sold the pistols to Umholtz! He's just as
big a crook as Rivers was, only not quite so smart."

Rand nodded thoughtfully. "Maybe so. And suppose Rivers found out about
it, and tried to declare himself in on it. That stuff would be worth at
least ten thousand; I doubt if whoever bought it paid Walters more than
two. In the Umholtz-Rivers income bracket, the difference might be worth
killing for."

"That's right. And Umholtz was in the infantry, in the other war; he
served in the Twenty-eighth Division. He was trained to use a bayonet.
And he'd pick that short Mauser; it has about the same weight and balance
as a 1903 Springfield."

"Well, you know, the killer wouldn't need to have been trained to use a
bayonet," Rand pointed out. "Mick McKenna made that point, this
afternoon. There have been a lot of war-movies that showed bayonet
fighting; pretty nearly everybody knows about the technique that was
used. And against an unarmed and probably unsuspecting victim like
Rivers, a great deal of proficiency wouldn't be needed." He slowed the
car. "Up this road?" he asked.

"Yes. That's my place, over there."

Pierre pointed to a white-walled, red-roofed house that lay against a
hillside, about a mile ahead, making a vivid spot in the dull grays and
greens of the early April landscape. It consisted of a square two-story
block, with one-story wings projecting to give it an L-shaped floorplan.
It reminded Rand of farmhouses he had seen in Sicily during the War.

"Come on in and see my stuff, if you have time," Pierre invited, as
Rand pulled to a stop in the driveway. "I think I told you what I
collect--personal combat arms, both firearms and edge-weapons."

They entered the front door, which opened directly into a large parlor, a
brightly colored, cheerful room. A woman rose from a chair where she had
been reading. She was somewhere between forty-five and fifty, but her
figure was still trim, and she retained much of what, in her youth, must
have been great beauty.

"Mother, this is Colonel Rand," Pierre said. "Jeff, my mother."

Rand shook hands with her, and said something polite. She gave him a
smile of real pleasure.

"Pierre has been telling me about you, Colonel," she said. There was a
faint trace of French accent in her voice. "I suppose he brought you here
to show you his treasures?"

"Yes; I collect arms too. Pistols," Rand said.

She laughed. "You gun-collectors; you're like women looking at somebody's
new hat.... Will you stay for dinner with us, Colonel Rand?"

"Why, I'm sorry; I can't. I have a great many things to do, and I'm
expected for dinner at the Flemings'. I really wish I could, Mrs.
Jarrett. Maybe some other time."

They chatted for a few minutes, then Pierre guided Rand into one of the
wings of the house.

"This is my workshop, too," he said. "Here's where I do my writing." He
opened a door and showed Rand into a large room.

On one side, the wall was blank; on the other, it was pierced by two
small casement windows. The far end was of windows for its entire width,
from within three feet of the floor almost to the ceiling. There were
bookcases on either long side, and on the rear end, and over them hung
Pierre's weapons. Rand went slowly around the room, taking everything in.
Very few of the arms were of issue military type, and most of these
showed alterations to suit individual requirements. As Pierre had told
him the evening before, the emphasis was upon weapons which illustrated
techniques of combat.

At the end of the room, lighted by the wide windows, was a long
desk which was really a writer's assembly line, with typewriter,
reference-books, stacks of notes and manuscripts, and a big dictionary
on a stand beside a comfortable swivel-chair.

"What are you writing?" Rand asked.

"Science-fiction. I do a lot of stories for the pulps," Pierre told him.
"_Space-Trails_, and _Other Worlds_, and _Wonder-Stories_; mags like
that. Most of it's standardized formula-stuff; what's known to the trade
as space-operas. My best stuff goes to _Astonishing_. Parenthetically,
you mustn't judge any of these magazines by their names. It seems to be
a convention to use hyperbolic names for science-fiction magazines; a
heritage from what might be called an earlier and ruder day. What I do
for _Astonishing_ is really hard work, and I enjoy it. I'm working now on
one for them, based on J. W. Dunne's time-theories, if you know what they
are."

"I think so," Rand said. "Polydimensional time, isn't it? Based on an
effect Dunne observed and described--dreams obviously related to some
waking event, but preceding rather than following the event to which they
are related. I read Dunne's _Experiment with Time_ some years before the
war, and once, when I had nothing better to do, I recorded dreams for
about a month. I got a few doubtful-to-fair examples, and two
unmistakable Dunne-Effect dreams. I never got anything that would help
me pick a race-winner or spot a rise in the stock market, though."

"Well, you know, there's a case on record of a man who had a dream of
hearing a radio narration of the English Derby of 1933, including the
announcement that Hyperion had won, which he did," Pierre said. "The
dream was six hours before the race, and tallied very closely with the
phraseology used by the radio narrator. Here." He picked up a copy of
Tyrrell's _Science and Psychical Phenomena_ and leafed through it.

"Did this fellow cash in on it?" Rand asked.

"No. He was a Quaker, and violently opposed to betting. Here." He handed
the book to Rand. "Case Twelve."

Rand sat down on the edge of the desk, and read the section indicated,
about three pages in length.

"Well, I'll be damned!" he said, as he finished. The idea of anybody
passing up a chance like that to enrich himself literally smote him to
the vitals. "I see the British Society for Psychical Research checked
that case, and got verification from a couple of independent witnesses.
If the S.P.R. vouches for a story, it must be the McCoy; they're the
toughest-minded gang of confirmed skeptics anywhere in Christendom. They
take an attitude toward evidence that might be advantageously copied by
most of the district attorneys I've met, the one in this county being no
exception.... What's this story you're working on?"

"Oh, it's based on Dunne's precognition theories, plus a few ideas of my
own, plus a theory of alternate lines of time-sequence for alternate
probabilities," Pierre said. "See, here's the situation ..."

Half an hour later, they were still arguing about a multidimensional
universe when Rand remembered Dave Ritter, who should be at the Rosemont
Inn by now. He looked at his watch, saw that it was five forty-five, and
inquired about a telephone.

"Yes, of course; out here." Pierre took him back to the parlor, where he
dialed the Inn and inquired if a Mr. Ritter, from New Belfast, were
registered there yet.

He was. A moment later he was speaking to Ritter.

"Jeff, for Gawdsake, don't come here," Ritter advised. "This place is
six-deep with reporters; the bar sounds like the second act of _The Front
Page_. Tony Ashe and Steve Drake from the _Dispatch_ and _Express_;
Harry Bentz, from the _Mercury_; Joe Rawlings, the AP man from Louisburg;
Christ only knows who all. This damn thing's going to turn into another
Hall-Mills case! Look, meet me at that beer joint, about two miles on the
New Belfast side of Rosemont, on Route 19; the white-with-red-trimmings
place with the big Pabst sign out in front. I'll try to get there without
letting a couple of reporters hide in the luggage-trunk."

"Okay; see you directly."

Rand hung up, spent the next few minutes breaking away from Pierre and
his mother, and went out to his car. Trust Dave Ritter, he thought, to
pick some place where malt beverages were sold, for a rendezvous.

Dave's coupé was parked inconspicuously beside the red-trimmed roadhouse.
Opening his glove-box, Rand took out the two percussion revolvers and
shoved them under his trench coat, one on either side, pulling up the
belt to hold them in place. As he went into the roadhouse, he felt like
Damon Runyon's Twelve-Gun Tweeney. He found Ritter in the last booth,
engaged in finishing a bottle of beer. Rand ordered Bourbon and plain
water, and Ritter ordered another beer.

"I have the stuff Tip left with Kathie," Ritter said, taking out a couple
of closely typed sheets and handing them across the table. "He said this
was the whole business."

Rand glanced over them. Tipton had neatly and concisely summarized the
provisions of Lane Fleming's will, and had also listed all Fleming's life
insurance policies, with beneficiaries, including a partnership policy on
the lives of Fleming, Dunmore, and Anton Varcek, paying each of the
survivors $25,000.

"I see Gladys and Geraldine and Nelda each get a third of Fleming's
Premix stock," Rand commented. "But before they can have the certificates
transferred to them, they have to sign over their voting-power to the
board of directors. Evidently Fleming didn't approve of the feminine
touch in business."

"Yeah, isn't that a dandy?" Ritter asked. "The directors are elected by
majority vote of the stockholders. They now have the voting-power of a
majority of the stock; that makes the present board self-perpetuating,
and responsible only to each other."

"So it does, but that wasn't what I was thinking of. According to Tip,
the board is one hundred per cent in favor of the merger with National
Milling & Packaging. We'll have to suppose Fleming knew that; there must
have been considerable intramural acrimony on the subject while he was
still alive. Now, since he opposed the merger, if he had intended
committing suicide, he would have made some other arrangement, wouldn't
he? At least, one would suppose so. Well, then," Rand asked, "why, since
he is so worried about these suicide rumors, doesn't Goode use the one
argument which would utterly disprove them? Or is there some reason
why he doesn't want to call attention to the fact that Fleming's death
is what makes the merger possible?"

"Well, that would be calling attention to the fact that the merger made
Fleming's death necessary," Ritter pointed out. He poured more beer into
his glass. "While we're on it, what's the angle on this butler's livery
I was supposed to bring? I brought my tux, and I borrowed a striped vest
from the Theatrical Property Exchange, and I brought that Dago .380 of
yours. But what makes you think the Flemings are going to be needing a
new butler? You going to poison the one they have?"

"The one they have has been exceeding his duties," Rand said. "He was
supposed to clean the pistol-collection. Not content with that, he's
been cleaning it out. I know it was the butler." He went, at length,
into his reasons for thinking so, and described the _modus operandi_ of
the thefts. "Now, all this is just theory, so far, but when I'm able to
prove it, I'm going to put the arm on this Walters, if it's right in the
middle of dinner and he only has the roast half served. And I want you
ready to step into the vacancy thus created. I'm going to be busy as a
pup in a fireplug factory with this Rivers thing, and I'll need some
checking-upping done inside the Fleming household."

He went on, in meticulous detail, to explain about the Rivers murder.
"I'll have some work for you, before you're ready to start buttling,
too." Disencumbering himself of the two percussion revolvers, he laid
them on the table. "I want you to take these and show them to this
barbecue man. Get from him a positive statement, preferably in writing,
as to which, if either, he sold to Lane Fleming. You might show your
Agency card and claim to be checking up on some stolen pistols that
have been recovered. Then, if he identifies the Leech & Rigdon, take the
Colt and show it to Elmer Umholtz. You want to be careful how you handle
him; we may want him for puncturing Rivers, though I'm inclined to doubt
that, as of now. Get him to tell you, yes or no, whether he reblued it
and replated the back-strap and trigger-guard, and if he did it for
Rivers; and if so, when. I know that's been done; the bluing is too dark
for a Civil War period job; the frame, which ought to be case-hardened
in colors, has been blued like the barrel and cylinder, the
cylinder-engraving is almost obliterated, and you can see a few rust-pits
that have been blued over. But I want to know if this gun was ever in
Rivers's shop; that's the important thing."

"Uh-huh. Got the addresses?"

Rand furnished them, and Ritter noted them down. The waitress wandered
back to see if they wanted anything else; she gave a small squeak of
surprise when she saw the two big six-shooters on the table. Rand and
Ritter repeated their orders, and when she brought back the drinks, the
Colt and the Leech & Rigdon were out of sight.

"The way I see it, everybody who's within a light-year of this Rivers
killing is trying to pin the medal on somebody else," Ritter was saying.
"The Lawrence girl was afraid young Jarrett had done it; right away, she
sicced you onto Gillis. Gillis didn't lose any time putting McKenna and
Farnsworth onto Gresham. Gresham's the only one who didn't have a patsy
ready; you're supposed to dig one up for him. And Jarrett, the first
chance he gets, introduces Umholtz." He stared into his beer, as though
he thought Ultimate Verity might be lurking somewhere under the suds. "Do
you think it might be possible that Rivers bumped Fleming off, in spite
of his getting killed later?" he asked.

"Anything's possible," Rand replied, "except where some structural
contradiction is involved, like scoring thirteen with one throw of a pair
of dice. Yes, he could have. The way the Flemings leave their garage open
as long as any of the cars are out, anybody could have sneaked into the
house from the garage, and gone up from the library to the gunroom. The
only question in my mind is whether Rivers would have known about that.
That lawsuit and criminal action that Fleming was going to start--and
that's been verified from sources independent of Goode--was a good sound
motive. And say he took the Leech & Rigdon away, after leaving the Colt
in Fleming's hand; selling it to some collector who'd put it in with a
hundred or so other pistols would be a good way of disposing of it. And I
can understand his trying to buy the Colt, to get it out of circulation."
Rand sipped his Bourbon. "But that leaves us with the question of who
killed Rivers, and why."

"Well, because Fleming is dead--and it doesn't matter whether he was
murdered or died of old age--Walters starts robbing the collection. He
sells the pistols to Rivers," Ritter reconstructed. "And, as Rivers
doesn't want them around his shop till they've had time to cool off, he
stores them with this Umholtz character, who seems to have been in plenty
of crooked deals with Rivers in the past. The pistols are worth about ten
grand, and nobody knows where they are but Rivers and Umholtz, and if
Rivers drops dead all of a sudden, nobody will know where they are except
Umholtz, and in a couple of years he can get them sold off and have the
money all to himself."

"Yes, Dave; that's good sound murder, too. And Rivers would sit down and
drink with Umholtz, and Umholtz could take that Mauser out of the rack
right in front of Rivers and Rivers wouldn't suspect a thing till it was
too late. Of course, it depends upon two unverified assumptions: One,
that the pistols were sold to Rivers, and, two, that Rivers stored them
with Umholtz."

"And, three, that Walters stole the pistols in the first place," Ritter
added. "You know, it's possible that somebody else in that house might
have stolen them."

"Yes. As I said, anything's possible, within structural limits, but
possibilities exist on different orders of probability. We can't try to
consider all the possibilities in any case, because they are indefinitely
numerous; the best we can do is screen out all the low-order
probabilities, list the high-order probabilities, and revise our list
when and as new data comes to light. Well, I've told you why I think
Walters is a good suspect. From what I've seen of that household, I think
Walters was personally loyal to Lane Fleming, and I don't believe he
feels any loyalty to anybody else there, with the exception of Gladys
Fleming. He might keep quiet about the missing pistols if she were the
thief; if Dunmore, or Varcek, or either of the girls had done the
stealing, he'd tell Gladys, and she'd pass it on to me. She would be
glad of anything that could be used against any of the others. And if,
on the other hand, she had stolen the pistols herself, she wouldn't have
wanted me poking around, and wouldn't have brought me in, at least not
to handle the collection." Rand looked regretfully at his empty glass and
decided against ordering another. "Dave, I just thought of something," he
said. "How do you think this would work?"

He told Ritter what he had thought of. Ritter drank beer slowly and
meditatively.

"It just might work," he considered. "I've seen that gag work a hundred
times: hell, I've used something like that, myself, at least fifty times,
and so have you. And I don't think Walters would be familiar enough with
dick-practice to see what you were doing. But if it turns out that
Walters didn't sell the pistols to Rivers at all, what then?"

"Well, if he sold them to Umholtz, Pierre Jarrett's theory is still valid
until disproved," Rand said. "And if he didn't sell them either to Rivers
or Umholtz, we'll have to conclude that Rivers and Fleming were killed by
the same person, the Rivers killing being a security measure. That is,
unless we find that Rivers was killed by Pierre Jarrett, which is a sort
of medium-high-order probability. Jarrett and the girl left Gresham's
early enough for him to have killed Rivers; they were both pretty hard
hit by that twenty-five-grand blockbuster Rivers had dropped on
them.... Give me back that Colt, Dave. All you have to do is get an
identification on the Leech & Rigdon from the barbecue man. I'm going
to let Mick McKenna handle Umholtz, one way or another, after we've
concluded the Walters experiment. Until then, we don't want to stir
Umholtz up, at all."




CHAPTER 15


Parking in the drive, Rand entered the Fleming house by the front door.
The butler must have been busy with his pre-dinner tasks in the rear; it
was Gladys herself who admitted him.

"Stay out of there," she warned him, taking his arm and guiding him away
from the parlor doorway. "Nelda and Geraldine are in there, ignoring each
other. If you go in, they'll start talking to you, and then they'll start
talking at each other through you, and the air will be full of tomahawks
in a jiffy. Let's go up in the gunroom; that's out of the battle zone."

"What started the hostilities this time?" Rand asked, going up the
stairway with her.

"Oh, Geraldine lost Nelda's place-marker out of the Kinsey Report, or
something." She shrugged. "Mainly reaction to Rivers's death. That was a
great blow to all of us; twenty-five thousand dollars' worth of blow. It
was a blow to me, too, but I'm not letting it throw me.... What were you
doing all afternoon?"

"Trying to keep the rest of our prospects out of jail. This
sixteenth-witted District Attorney you have in this county had the idea
he could charge Stephen Gresham with the killing. I had a time talking
him out of it, and I'm still not sure how far I succeeded. And I was
trying to get a line on where those pistols got to."

"Ssssh!" They reached the top of the stairs, and Rand saw Walters
approaching down the hall. "It was Colonel Rand, Walters; I let him in
myself. Are Mr. Varcek and Mr. Dunmore here, yet?"

"Mr. Dunmore is in the library, ma'am, and Mr. Varcek is upstairs, in his
laboratory. Dinner will be ready in three-quarters of an hour."

"Have you mixed the cocktails? You'd better do that. Serve them in about
twenty minutes. And you'd better go up and warn Mr. Varcek not to become
involved in anything messy before dinner."

Walters yes-ma'am'd her and started toward the attic stairway. Rand and
Gladys went into the gunroom; Rand turned to the left, picked a pistol
from the wall, and carried it with him as he guided Gladys toward the
desk in the corner.

"You think Walters stole them?" she asked.

"So far, I'm inclined to. Have you told any of the others, yet?"

"Oh, Lord, no! They'd all be sure that I stole them myself. I'm counting
on you to get them back with as little fuss as possible. Do you think
that was why Rivers was killed? After all, when a lot of valuable pistols
disappear, and a crooked dealer is murdered, I'd expect there to be a
connection."

"There could be. Did you ever hear any stories about Mrs. Rivers and this
young fellow Gillis who works in Rivers's shop?"

Gladys laughed. "Is that rearing its ugly head in public, now?" she
asked. "Well, there's nothing like a good murder to shake the skeletons
out of the closets. Not that this particular skeleton was ever exactly
hidden. The stories are numerous, and somewhat repetitious; Cecil and
Mrs. Rivers would be seen together, at roadhouses and so on, at what they
imagined was a safe distance from Rosemont, and it was said that when
Rivers was away over night, Cecil was never seen to leave the Rivers
place in the evenings. Might this be relevant to Rivers's sudden demise?"

"It could be." Rand was keeping one eye on the hall door and the other on
the head of the spiral stairway. "Don't mention outside what I told you
about Farnsworth having this brainstorm about Stephen Gresham. If it got
out, it might hurt Gresham professionally. The fact is, Gresham has just
retained me to investigate the Rivers murder for him. That won't
interfere to any great extent with the work I'm doing here; if necessary,
I'll bring a couple of my men in from New Belfast to help me on the
Rivers operation." He broke off abruptly, catching a movement at the head
of the spiral, and lifted the pistol in his hand, as though showing it to
Gladys. "See," he went on, "it has two hammers and two nipples, but only
one barrel. It was loaded with two charges, one on top of the other; the
bullet of the rear charge acted as the breech-plug for the front
charge.... Oh, Walters!" He affected to catch sight of the butler for the
first time. "Bring me that .36 Walch revolver, will you?"

"Yes, sir." Walters, crossing the room, veered to the right and went
to the middle wall, bringing a revolver over to the desk. It was a
percussion weapon with an abnormally long cylinder. "The cocktails are
served," he announced.

"We'll be down in a moment; you can put these back where they belong when
you find time," Rand told him. "Now, here," he said to Gladys. "This is
the same idea, in a revolver. Six chambers, two charges in each. In
theory, it was a good idea, but in actual practice ..."

Walters went out the hall door, presumably to call Varcek. Rand continued
talking about the superposed-load principle, as used in the Lindsay
pistol and the Walch revolver, until he was sure the butler was out
of hearing. Gladys was looking at him in appreciative if slightly
punch-drunk delight.

"I wondered why you brought that thing over here with you," she said.
"Brother, was that a quick shift!... You're really sure he's the one?"

"I'm not really sure of anything, except of my own existence and eventual
extinction," Rand told her. "It pretty nearly has to be somebody inside
this house. I don't think anybody else here, yourself included, would
know enough about arms to rob this collection as selectively as it has
been robbed. Did you see what just happened, here? I asked him for one of
the most uncommon arms here, and he went straight and got it. He knows
this collection as well as your husband did, and I assume he knows values
almost as well.... And, of course, there was a musket, too; Mr. Fleming
didn't collect long-arms, or he'd have had one. It embodied the same
principle as the pistol. The legend is that this man Lindsay's brother
was a soldier; he was supposed to have been killed by Indians who drew
the fire of the detail he was with and then charged them when their
muskets were empty." Rand shrugged. "Actually, the superposed-load
principle is ancient; there's a sixteenth-century wheel lock pistol in
the Metropolitan Museum, in New York, firing two shots from the same
barrel."

Varcek and the butler, who had entered by the hall door, went across the
gunroom and down the spiral. Rand laid down the pistol and escorted
Gladys after them.

Dunmore and Geraldine were in the library when they went down. Geraldine,
mildly potted, was reclining in a chair, sipping her drink. Dunmore was
still radiating his synthetic cheerfulness.

"Get many of the pistols listed, Colonel?" he hailed Rand, with jovial
condescension.

"No." Rand poured two cocktails, handing one to Gladys. "I went to Arnold
Rivers's place this morning, on a little unfinished business, and damn
near tripped over Rivers's corpse. I spent the rest of the day getting
myself disinvolved from the ensuing uproar," he told Dunmore. "You heard
about it, of course."

"Yes, of course. Horrible business. I hope you didn't get mixed up in it
any more than you had to. After all, you're working for us, and if the
police knew that, we'd be bothered, too.... Look here, you don't think
some of these other people who were after the collection might have
killed Rivers, to keep him from outbidding them?"

Nelda, entering from the hallway, caught the last part of that.

"Good God, Fred!" she shrieked at him. "Don't say things like that! Maybe
they did, but wait till they've bought the collection and paid for it,
before you start accusing them!"

"I'm not accusing anybody," Dunmore growled back at her. "I don't know
enough about it to make any accusations. All I'm saying is--"

"Well, don't say it, then, if you don't know what you're talking about,"
his wife retorted.

In spite of this start, dinner passed in relative quiet. For the most
part, they talked about the remaining chances of selling the collection,
about which nobody was optimistic. Rand tried to build up morale with
pictures of large museums and important dealers, all fairly slavering to
get their fangs into the Fleming collection, but to little avail. A pall
of gloom had settled, and he was forced to concede that he had at last
found somebody who had a valid reason to mourn the sudden and violent end
of Arnold Rivers.

Dinner finished, he went up to the gunroom and began compiling his list.
He found a yardstick, and thumbtacked it to the edge of the desk to get
over-all and barrel lengths, and used a pair of inside calipers and a
decimal-inch rule from the workbench to get calibers. Sticking a sheet of
paper into the portable, he began on the wheel locks, leaving spaces to
insert the description of the stolen pistols, when recovered. When he had
finished the wheel locks, he began on the snaphaunces, then did the
miguelet-locks. He had begun on the true flintlocks when Walters, who had
finished his own dinner, came up to help him. Rand put the butler to work
fetching pistols from the racks, and replacing those he had already
listed. After a while, Dunmore strolled in.

"You say you found Rivers's body yourself, Colonel Rand?" he asked.

Rand nodded, finished what he was typing, and looked up.

"Why, yes. There were a few details I wanted to clear up with him, and I
called at his shop this morning. I found him lying dead inside." He went
on to describe the manner in which Rivers had met his death. "The radio
and newspaper accounts were accurate enough, in the main; there were a
few details omitted, at the request of the police, of course."

"Well, you didn't get involved in it, though?" Dunmore inquired
anxiously. "I mean, you're not taking any part in the investigation?
After all, we don't want to be mixed up in anything like this."

"In that case, Mr. Dunmore, let me advise you not to discuss the matter
of Rivers's offer to buy this collection with anybody outside," Rand told
him. "So far, the police and the District Attorney's office both seem to
think that Rivers was killed by somebody whom he'd swindled in a business
deal. Of course, they know about the collection being for sale, and
Rivers's offering to buy it."

"They do?" Dunmore asked sharply. "Did you tell them that?"

"Naturally. I had to account for my presence at Rivers's shop, this
morning," Rand replied. "I don't know if the idea has occurred to them
that somebody might have killed Rivers to eliminate a rival bidder for
the collection or not; I wouldn't say anything, if I were you, that might
give them the idea."

The extension phone rang shrilly. Walters picked it up, spoke into it,
and listened for a moment.

"Yes, Miss Lawrence; he's right here. You wish to speak to him?" He
handed the phone across the desk to Rand. "Miss Karen Lawrence, for you,
Colonel Rand."

Rand took the phone. Before he had time to say "hello," the antique-shop
girl demanded of him:

"Colonel Rand, you must tell me the truth. Did you have anything to do
with Pierre Jarrett's being arrested?"

"_What?_" Rand barked. Then he softened his voice. "No; on my honor, Miss
Lawrence. I knew nothing about it until this moment. Who did it? Olsen?"

"I don't know what his name was. He was a State Police sergeant," she
replied. "He and another State Policeman came to the Jarrett house about
half an hour ago, charged Pierre with the murder of Arnold Rivers, and
took him away. His mother phoned me about it a few minutes ago."

"That God-damned two-faced Jesuitical bastard!" Rand exploded. "Where are
you now?"

"Here at my shop. Mrs. Jarrett is coming here. She's afraid the reporters
will be coming out to the house as soon as they hear about it, and she
doesn't want to talk to them."

"All right. I'll be there as soon as I can. If there's anything I can do
to help you, you can count on me for it."

He hung up, and turned to Walters. "Is my car still out front?" he asked.
"It is? Good. I'll be gone for a while; tell the others I have something
to attend to."

"What's happened now?" Dunmore asked sourly.

"Just what I was speaking about. The Gestapo gathered up Pierre Jarrett;
they seem to have gotten the idea, now, that the motive may have been
competition for the collection. Next thing, Farnsworth will think he has
a case against Carl Gwinnett, and he'll land in the jug, too. I hope you
realize that every time something like this happens, it peels a thousand
or so off the price I'll be able to get for you people for these
pistols."

Dunmore didn't try to ask how that would happen, for which Rand was duly
thankful; he accepted the statement uncritically. Walters was staring at
Rand in horror, saying nothing. Rand picked up the outside phone and
dialed the same number he had called from the Rivers place that morning.

"Is Sergeant McKenna about?... He is? Fine; I'd like to speak to
him.... Oh, hello, Mick; Jeff Rand."

McKenna chuckled out of the receiver. "Sort of slipped one over on you,
didn't I?" he gloated. "Why, I was checking up on those people who were
at Gresham's, last evening, and they all agreed that young Jarrett and
the Lawrence girl had left the party about ten. So I had a talk with Miss
Lawrence, and she tried to tell me that Jarrett was with her at her
apartment, over the antique shop, from about ten fifteen until about
twelve, when another girl she rooms with got home from a date. I'd of
took that, too, only right across the street from the antique shop there
is one of these old hens like you find in every neighborhood, the kind
that keeps their nose flattened on the window between the curtains,
checking up on the neighbors. I spotted her when I came out of the
antique shop, so I slipped around to see her, and she told me that young
Jarrett went into the apartment with the girl at about quarter past ten,
stayed inside for about twenty minutes, then came out and drove away. She
says Jarrett came back in about half an hour, and stayed till this girl
who shares the Lawrence girl's apartment--a Miss Dupont, who teaches
sixth grade at Thaddeus Stevens School--got home, about twelve. So there
you are."

"Uh-huh. Dave Ritter said this was going to turn into another Hall-Mills
case; well, now you have your Pig Woman," Rand said. "Miss Lawrence
shouldn't have lied to you, Mick. I suppose she got worried when you
started asking questions, and there's nothing like a good murder in the
neighborhood to make liars out of people."

"And damn well I know that!" McKenna agreed. "But that isn't all. It
seems our cruise-car crew spotted Jarrett's car standing in Rivers's
drive, about eleven. Just when he was away from the antique-shop, and
about when the M.E. figures Rivers was getting the business."

"Did they get the number?" Rand asked. "Or how did they identify the
car?"

"Oh, they knew it; see, our boys shoot a lot with the Scott County Rifle
& Pistol Club, and they've all seen Jarrett's car at the range, different
times," McKenna said. "A gray 1947 Plymouth coupé. Like I say, they knew
the car, and they knew Jarrett collects guns, and the lights were on
inside the shop and the shades were drawn, so they didn't think anything
of it, at the time. See, they went to bed about ten this morning, and
didn't get up till after five, so I didn't find out about it till after
supper."

Rand shrugged, and managed to get some of the shrug into his voice. "Can
be, at that," he said. "I hope you're not making a mistake, Mick; if you
are, his lawyer's going to crucify you. What are you using for a motive?"

"Rivers was outbidding this crowd Jarrett and the girl were in with. They
all told me about that," McKenna said. "And he and the girl were planning
to use their end of the collection to go into the arms business, after
they got married. Rivers got in the way." McKenna, at the other end of
the line, must have shrugged, too. "After all, for about four years,
they'd been training Jarrett to overcome resistance with the bayonet, so
he did just that."

"Maybe so. You find out anything about that other matter I was interested
in?"

"You mean the pistols? Huh-unh; we went over Rivers's place with a
fine-tooth comb, and questioned young Gillis about it, and we didn't get
a thing. You sure those pistols went to Rivers?"

"I'm not sure of anything at all," Rand replied, looking at his watch.
"You going to be in, say in a couple of hours? I want to have a talk with
you."

"Sure. I'll be around all evening," McKenna assured him. "If we don't
have another murder."

Rand hung up. He pulled the sheet out of the typewriter, laid it
face down on the other sheets he had finished, and laid a long
seventeenth-century Flemish flintlock on top for a paperweight,
memorizing the position of the pistol relative to the paper under it.

"Put those pistols back on the wall," he told Walters, indicating several
he had laid aside after listing. "Leave the others there; I'm not
finished with them yet. I'll be back before too long. If I don't find any
more bodies."




CHAPTER 16


It was raining again as Rand parked his car about a hundred yards up the
street from Karen Lawrence's antique-shop. The windows were dark, but
Karen was waiting inside the door for him. He entered quickly, mindful of
the All-Seeing Eye across the street, and followed her to a back room,
where Mrs. Jarrett and Dorothy Gresham were. All three women regarded him
intently, as though trying to decide whether he was friend or enemy.
There was a long silence before Mrs. Jarrett spoke, and when she did, her
words were almost the same as Karen's when she had spoken over the phone.

"Colonel Rand," she began, obviously struggling with herself, "you must
tell me the truth. Did you have anything to do with my son's being
arrested?"

Rand shook his head. "Absolutely nothing, Mrs. Jarrett," he told her,
unbuckling the belt of his raincoat and taking it off. "I have never
seriously suspected your son of the Rivers murder, I had no idea that
McKenna was contemplating arresting him, and if I had, I would have
advised him against it. Besides causing annoyance to innocent people,
McKenna's made a serious tactical error. He was misled by appearances,
and he was afraid I'd break this case before he did, which I intend to
do." He turned to Karen Lawrence. "I talked to McKenna after you called
me; he as much as admitted making that arrest to get in ahead of me."

"I told you," Dorothy Gresham flashed at the others. "I knew Jeff
wouldn't stoop to anything as contemptible as pretending to be Pierre's
friend and then getting him arrested!"

Rand permitted himself a wry inward smile. He hoped she would not have an
opportunity to observe his stooping capabilities before he had finished
his various operations at Rosemont.

"I certainly hoped not." Mrs. Jarrett relaxed, smiling faintly at Rand.
"Pierre likes you, Colonel. I hated the thought that you might have
betrayed him. Are you working on the Rivers case, too?"

Rand nodded again, turning to Dot Gresham. "Your father retained me to
make an investigation," he said. "After that trouble he had with Rivers
about that spurious North & Cheney, he wanted the murderer caught before
somebody got around to accusing him."

"You mean there's a chance Dad might be suspected?" Dot was scared.

Rand nodded. The girl was beginning to look suspiciously at Karen and
Mrs. Jarrett. Getting ready to toss Pierre to the wolves if her father
were in danger, Rand suspected. He hastened to reassure her.

"Rivers was still alive when your father reached home, last evening," he
told her. "That's been established."

She breathed her obvious relief. If Gresham had left home after Rand's
departure with Philip Cabot, she didn't know it.

Karen, on the other hand, was growing more and more worried.

"Look, Colonel," she began. "They didn't just pull Pierre's name out of a
hat. They must have had something to suspect him about."

"Yes. You shouldn't have lied to McKenna. He checked up on your story;
the woman across the street told him about seeing Pierre leave here a
little before eleven and come back about half an hour later."

"I was afraid of that," Karen said. "I forgot all about that old hag.
There's nothing that can go on around here that she doesn't know about;
Pierre calls her Mrs. G2."

"And then," Rand continued, "McKenna claims that a car like Pierre's was
seen parked in Rivers's drive about the time Pierre was away from here."

Mrs. Jarrett moaned softly; her face, already haggard, became positively
ghastly. Karen gasped in fright.

"They only identified it as to model and make; they didn't get the
license number ... Where did Pierre go, while he was away from here?"

"He went out for cigarettes," Karen said. "When we came here from
Greshams', we made some coffee, and then sat and talked for a while, and
then we found out that we were both out of cigarettes and there weren't
any here. So Pierre said he'd go out and get some. He was gone about half
an hour; when he came back, he had a carton, and some hot pork
sandwiches. He'd gotten them at the same place as the cigarettes--Art
Igoe's lunch-stand."

"Could Igoe verify that?"

"It wouldn't help if he did. Igoe's place isn't a five-minute drive from
Rivers's, farther down the road."

"Has Pierre a lawyer?" Rand asked.

"No. Not yet. We were just talking about that."

"Dad would defend him," Dot suggested. "Of course, he's not a criminal
lawyer--"

"Carter Tipton, in New Belfast," Rand told them. "He's my lawyer; he's
gotten me out of more jams than you could shake a stick at. Where's the
telephone? I'll call him now."

"You think he'd defend Pierre?"

"Unless I'm badly mistaken, Pierre isn't going to need any trial
defense," Rand told them. "He will need somebody to look after his
interests, and we'll try to get him out on a writ as soon as possible."

He looked at his watch. It was ten minutes to nine. It was hard to say
where Carter Tipton would be at the moment; his manservant would probably
know. Karen showed him the phone and he started to put through a
person-to-person call.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was eleven o'clock before he backed his car into the Fleming garage,
and the rain had turned to a wet, sticky snow. All the Fleming cars were
in, but Rand left the garage doors open. He also left his hat and coat in
the car.

After locating and talking to Tipton and arranging for him to meet Dave
Ritter at the Rosemont Inn, he had gone to the State Police substation,
where he had talked at length with Mick McKenna. He had been compelled to
tell the State Police sergeant a number of things he had intended keeping
to himself. When he was through, McKenna went so far as to admit that he
had been a trifle hasty in arresting Pierre Jarrett. Rand suspected that
he was mentally kicking himself with hobnailed boots for his premature
act. He also submitted, for McKenna's approval, the scheme he had
outlined to Dave Ritter, and obtained a promise of cooperation.

When he entered the Fleming library, en route to the gunroom, he found
the entire family assembled there; with them was Humphrey Goode. As he
came in, they broke off what had evidently been an acrimonious dispute
and gave him their undivided attention. Geraldine, relaxed in a chair,
was smoking; for once, she didn't have a glass in her hand. Gladys
occupied another chair; she was smoking, too. Nelda had been pacing back
and forth like a caged tiger; at Rand's entrance, she turned to face him,
and Rand wondered whether she thought he was Clyde Beatty or a side of
beef. Goode and Dunmore sat together on the sofa, forming what looked
like a bilateral offensive and defensive alliance, and Varcek, looking
more than ever like Rudolf Hess, stood with folded arms in one corner.

"Now, see here, Rand," Dunmore began, as soon as the detective was inside
the room, "we want to know just exactly for whom you're working, around
here. And I demand to know where you've been since you left here this
evening."

"And I," Goode piped up, "must protest most strongly against your
involvement in this local murder case. I am informed that, while in the
employ of this family, you accepted a retainer from another party to
investigate the death of Arnold Rivers."

"That's correct," Rand informed him. Then he turned to Gladys. "Just for
the record, Mrs. Fleming, do you recall any stipulation to the effect
that the business of handling this pistol-collection should have the
exclusive attention of my agency? I certainly don't recall anything of
the sort."

"No, of course not," she replied. "As long as the collection is sold to
the best advantage, I haven't any interest in any other business of your
agency, and have no right to have." She turned to the others. "I thought
I made that clear to all of you."

"You didn't answer my question!" Dunmore yelled at him.

"I don't intend to. You aren't my client, and I'm not answerable to you."

"Well, you carry my authorization," Goode supported him. "I think I have
a right to know what's being done."

"As far as the collection's concerned, yes. As for the Rivers murder, or
my armored-car service, or any other business of the Tri-State Agency,
no."

"Well, you made use of my authorization to get that revolver from
Kirchner--" Goode began.

"Aah!" Rand cried. "So that concerns the Rivers murder, does it? Well!
When did you find that out, now? When Kirchner called you, you had no
objection to his giving me that revolver. What changed your mind for
you? Didn't you know that Rivers was dead, then?" Rand watched Goode
trying to assimilate that. "Or didn't you think I knew?"

Goode cleared his throat noisily, twisting his mouth. The others were
looking back and forth from him to Rand, in obvious bewilderment; they
realized that Rand had pulled some kind of a rabbit out of a hat, but
they couldn't understand how he'd done it.

"What I mean is that since then you have allowed yourself to become
involved in this murder case. You have let it be publicly known that you
are a private detective, working for the Fleming family," Goode orated.
"How long, then, will it be before it will be said, by all sorts of
irresponsible persons, that you are also investigating the death of Lane
Fleming?"

"Well?" Rand asked patiently. "Are you afraid people will start calling
that a murder, too?"

Gladys was looking at him apprehensively, as though she were watching him
juggle four live hand grenades.

"Is anybody saying that now?" Varcek asked sharply.

"Not that I know of," Rand lied. "But if Goode keeps on denying it, they
will."

"You know perfectly well," Goode exploded, "that I am alluding to these
unfounded and mischievous rumors of suicide, which are doing the Premix
Company so much harm. My God, Mr. Rand, can't you realize--"

"Oh, come off it, Goode," Varcek broke in amusedly. "We all--Colonel Rand
included--know that you started those rumors yourself. Very clever--to
start a rumor by denying it. But scarcely original. Doctor Goebbels was
doing it almost twenty years ago."

"My God, is that true?" Nelda demanded. "You mean, he's been going around
starting all these stories about Father committing suicide?" She turned
on Goode like an enraged panther. "Why, you lying old son of a bitch!"
she screamed at him.

"Of course. He wants to start a selling run on Premix," Varcek explained
to her. "He's buying every share he can get his hands on. We all are." He
turned to Rand. "I'd advise you to buy some, if you can find any, Colonel
Rand. In a month or so, it's going to be a really good thing."

"I know about the merger. I am buying," Rand told him. "But are you sure
of what Goode's been doing?"

"Of course," Gladys put in contemptuously. "I always wondered about this
suicide talk; I couldn't see why Humphrey was so perturbed about it.
Anything that lowered the market price of Premix, at this time, would be
to his advantage." She looked at Goode as though he had six legs and a
hard shell. "You know, Humphrey, I can't say I exactly thank you for
this."

"Did you know about it?" Nelda demanded of her husband. "You did! My God,
Fred, you are a filthy specimen!"

"Oh, you know; anything to turn a dishonest dollar," Geraldine piped up.
"Like the late Arnold Rivers's ten-thousand offer. Say! I wonder if that
mightn't be what Rivers died of? Raising the price and leaving Fred out
in the cold!"

Dunmore simply stared at her, making a noise like a chicken choking on
a piece of string.

"Well, all this isn't my pidgin," Rand said to Gladys. "I only work here,
_Deo gratias_, and I still have some work to do."

With that, he walked past Goode and Dunmore and ascended the spiral
stairway to the gunroom. Even at the desk, in the far corner of the room,
he could hear them going at it, hammer-and-tongs, in the library.
Sometimes it would be Nelda's strident shrieks that would dominate the
bedlam below; sometimes it would be Fred Dunmore, roaring like a bull.
Now and then, Humphrey Goode would rumble something, and, once in a
while, he could hear Gladys's trained and modulated voice. Usually, any
remark she made would be followed by outraged shouts from Goode and
Dunmore, like the crash of falling masonry after the whip-crack of a
tank-gun.

At first Rand eavesdropped shamelessly, but there was nothing of more
than comic interest; it was just a routine parade and guard-mount of the
older and more dependable family skeletons, with special emphasis on
Humphrey Goode's business and professional ethics. When he was satisfied
that he would hear nothing having any bearing on the death of Lane
Fleming, Rand went back to his work.

After a while, the tumult gradually died out. Rand was still typing when
Gladys came up the spiral and perched on the corner of the desk, picking
up a long brass-barreled English flintlock and hefting it.

"You know, I sometimes wonder why we don't all come up here, break out
the ammunition, pick our weapons, and settle things," she said. "It never
was like this when Lane was around. Oh, Nelda and Geraldine would bare
their teeth at each other, once in a while, but now this place has turned
into a miniature Iwo Jima. I don't know how much longer I'm going to be
able to take it. I'm developing combat fatigue."

"It's snowing," Rand mentioned. "Let's throw them out into the storm."

"I can't. I have to give Nelda and Geraldine a home, as long as
they live," she replied. "Terms of the will. Oh, well, Geraldine'll
drink herself to death in a few years, and Nelda will elope with a
prize-fighter, sometime."

"Why don't you have the house haunted? The Tri-State Agency has an
excellent house-haunting department. Anything you want; poltergeists;
apparitions; cold, clammy hands in the dark; footsteps in the attic;
clanking chains and eldritch screams; banshees. Any three for the price
of two."

"It wouldn't work. Geraldine is so used to polka-dotted dinosaurs and
Little Green Men from Mars that she wouldn't mind an ordinary ghost, and
Nelda'd probably try to drag it into bed with her." She laid down the
pistol and slid off the desk. "Well, pleasant dreams; I'll see you in the
morning."

After she had left the gunroom, Rand looked at his watch. It was a
very precise instrument; a Swiss military watch, with a sweep second
hand, and two timing dials. It had formerly been the property of an
_Obergruppenführer_ of the S.S., and Rand had appropriated it to
replace his own, broken while choking the _Obergruppenführer_ to death
in an alley in Palermo. He zeroed the timing dials and pressed the
start-button. Then he stood for a time over the old cobbler's bench,
mentally reconstructing what had been done after Lane Fleming had
been shot, after which he hurried down the spiral and along the rear hall
to the garage, where he snatched his hat and coat from the car. He threw
the coat over his shoulders like a cloak, and went on outside. He made
his way across the lawn to the orchard, through the orchard to the lawn
of Humphrey Goode's house, and across this to Goode's side door. He stood
there for a few seconds, imagining himself opening the door and going
inside. Then he stopped the timing hands and returned to the Fleming
house, locking the garage doors behind him. In the garage, he looked at
the watch.

It had taken exactly six minutes and twenty-two seconds. He knew that he
could move more rapidly than the dumpy lawyer, but to balance that, he
had been moving over more or less unfamiliar ground. He left his hat and
trench coat in the car and went upstairs.

Undressing, he went into the bathroom in his dressing-gown, spent about
twenty minutes shaving and taking a shower, and then returned to his own
room.




CHAPTER 17


When he rose, the next morning, Rand noticed something which had escaped
his eye when he had gone to bed the night before. His .38-special, in its
shoulder-holster, was lying on the dresser; he had not bothered putting
it on when he had gone to see Rivers the morning before, and it had lain
there all the previous day. He distinctly remembered having moved it,
shortly after dinner, when he had gone to his room for some notes he had
made on the collection.

However, between that time and the present it had managed to flop itself
over; the holster was now lying back-up. Intrigued by such a remarkable
accomplishment in an inanimate object, Rand crossed the room in the
dress-of-nature in which he slept and looked more closely at it,
receiving a second and considerably more severe surprise. The revolver
in the holster was not his own.

It was, to be sure, a .38 Colt Detective Special, and it was in his
holster, but it was not the Detective Special he had brought with him
from New Belfast. His own gun was of the second type, with the corners
rounded off the grip; this one was of the original issue, with the square
Police Positive grip. His own gun had seen hard service; this one was in
practically new condition. There was a discrepancy of about thirty
thousand in the serial numbers. His gun had been loaded in six chambers
with the standard 158-grain loads; this one was loaded in only five, with
148-grain mid-range wad-cutter loads.

Rand stood for some time looking at the revolver. The worst of it was
that he couldn't be exactly sure when the substitution had been made. It
might have happened at any time between eight o'clock and twelve, when he
had gone to bed. He rather suspected that it had been accomplished while
he had been in the bathroom, however.

Dumping out the five rounds in the cylinder, he inspected the changeling
carefully. It was, he thought, the revolver Lane Fleming had kept in the
drawer of the gunroom desk. There was no obstruction in the two-inch
barrel, the weapon had not been either fired or cleaned recently, the
firing-pin had not been shortened, the mainspring showed the proper
amount of tension, and the mechanism functioned as it should. There was a
chance that somebody had made up five special hand-loads for him, using
nitroglycerin instead of powder, but that didn't seem likely, as it would
not necessitate a switch of revolvers. There were four or five other
possibilities, all of them disquieting; he would have been a great deal
less alarmed if somebody had taken a shot at him.

Getting a box of cartridges out of his Gladstone, he filled the
cylinder with 158-grain loads. When he went to the bathroom, he took
the revolver in his dressing-gown pocket; when he dressed, he put on
the shoulder-holster, and pocketed a handful of spare rounds.

Anton Varcek was loitering in the hall when he came out; he gave Rand
good-morning, and fell into step with him as they went toward the
stairway.

"Colonel Rand, I wish you wouldn't mention this to anybody, but I would
like a private talk with you," the Czech said. "After Fred Dunmore has
left for the plant. Would that be possible?"

"Yes, Mr. Varcek; I'll be in the gunroom all morning, working." They
reached the bottom of the stairway, where Gladys was waiting.
"Understand," Rand continued, "I never really studied biology. I was
exposed to it, in school, but at that time I was preoccupied with the
so-called social sciences."

Varcek took the conversational shift in stride. "Of course," he agreed.
"But you are trained in the scientific method of thought. That, at least,
is something. When I have opportunity to explain my ideas more fully, I
believe you will be interested in my conclusions."

They greeted Gladys, and walked with her to the dining-room. As usual,
Geraldine was absent; Dunmore and Nelda were already at the table, eating
in silence. Both of them seemed self-conscious, after the pitched battle
of the evening before. Rand broke the tension by offering Humphrey Goode
in the role of whipping-boy; he had no sooner made a remark in derogation
of the lawyer than Nelda and her husband broke into a duet of
vituperation. In the end, everybody affected to agree that the whole
unpleasant scene had been entirely Goode's fault, and a pleasant spirit
of mutual cordiality prevailed.

Finally Dunmore got up, wiping his mouth on a napkin.

"Well, it's about time to get to work," he said. "We might as well save
gas and both use my car. Coming, Anton?"

"I'm sorry, Fred; I can't leave, yet. I have some notes upstairs I have
to get in order. I was working on this new egg-powder, last evening, and
I want to continue the experiments at the plant laboratory. I think I
know how we'll be able to cut production costs on it, about five per
cent."

"And boy, can we stand that!" Dunmore grunted. "Well, be seeing you at
the plant."

Rand waited until Dunmore had left, then went across to the library and
up to the gunroom. As soon as he entered the room above, he saw what was
wrong. The previous thefts had been masked by substitutions, but whoever
had helped himself to one of the more recent metallic-cartridge
specimens, the night before, hadn't bothered with any such precaution,
and a pair of vacant screwhooks disclosed the removal. A second look told
Rand what had been taken: the little .25 Webley & Scott from the Pollard
collection, with the silencer.

The pistol-trade which had been imposed on him had disquieted him; now,
he had no hesitation in admitting to himself, he was badly scared.
Whoever had taken that little automatic had had only one thought in
mind--noiseless and stealthy murder. Very probably with one Colonel
Jefferson Davis Rand in mind as the prospective corpse.

He sat down at the desk and started typing, at the same time trying to
keep the hall door and the head of the spiral stairway under observation.
It was an attempt which was responsible for quite a number of
typographical errors. Finally, Anton Varcek came in from the hallway,
approached the desk, and sat down in an armchair.

"Colonel Rand," he began, in a low voice, "I have been thinking over a
remark you made, last evening. Were you serious when you alluded to the
possibility that Lane Fleming had been murdered?"

"Well, the idea had occurred to me," Rand understated, keeping his right
hand close to his left coat lapel. "I take it you have begun to doubt
that it was an accident?"

"I would doubt a theory that a skilled chemist would accidentally poison
himself in his own laboratory," Varcek replied. "I would not, for
instance, pour myself a drink from a bottle labeled HNO_3 in the belief
that it contained vodka. I believe that Lane Fleming should be credited
with equal caution about firearms."

"Yet you were the first to advance the theory that the shooting had been
an accident," Rand pointed out.

"I have a strong dislike for firearms." Varcek looked at the pistols on
the desk as though they were so many rattlesnakes. "I have always feared
an accident, with so many in the house. When I saw him lying dead, with a
revolver in his hand, that was my first thought. First thoughts are so
often illogical, emotional."

"And you didn't consider the possibility of suicide?"

"No! Absolutely not!" The Czech was emphatic. "The idea never occurred to
me, then or since. Lane Fleming was not the man to do that. He was deeply
religious, much interested in church work. And, aside from that, he had
no reason to wish to die. His health was excellent; much better than that
of many men twenty years his junior. He had no business worries. The
company is doing well, we had large Government contracts during the war
and no reconversion problems afterward, we now have more orders than we
have plant capacity to fill, and Mr. Fleming was consulting with
architects about plant expansion. We have been spared any serious labor
troubles. And Mr. Fleming's wife was devoted to him, and he to her. He
had no family troubles."

Rand raised an eyebrow over that last. "No?" he inquired.

Varcek flushed. "Please, Colonel Rand, you must not judge by what you
have seen since you came here. When Lane Fleming was alive, such scenes
as that in the library last evening would have been unthinkable. Now,
this family is like a ship without a captain."

"And since you do not think that he shot himself, either deliberately or
inadvertently, there remains the alternative that he was shot by somebody
else, either deliberately or, very improbably, by inadvertence," Rand
said. "I think the latter can be safely disregarded. Let's agree that it
was murder and go on from there."

Varcek nodded. "You are investigating it as such?" he asked.

"I am appraising and selling this pistol collection," Rand told him
wearily. "I am curious about who killed Fleming, of course; for my own
protection I like to know the background of situations in which I am
involved. But do you think Humphrey Goode would bring me here to stir up
a lot of sleeping dogs that might awake and grab him by the pants-seat?
Or did you think that uproar in the library last evening was just a
prearranged act?"

"I had not thought of Humphrey Goode. It was my understanding that Mrs.
Fleming brought you here."

"Mrs. Fleming wants her money out of the collection, as soon as
possible," Rand said. "To reopen the question of her husband's death and
start a murder investigation wouldn't exactly expedite things. I'm just a
more or less innocent bystander, who wants to know whether there is going
to be any trouble or not.... Now, you came here to tell me what happened
on the night of Lane Fleming's death, didn't you?"

"Yes. We had finished dinner at about seven," Varcek said. "Lane had been
up here for about an hour before dinner, working on his new revolver; he
came back here immediately after he was through eating. A little later,
when I had finished my coffee, I came upstairs, by the main stairway. The
door of this room was open, and Lane was inside, sitting on that old
shoemaker's-bench, working on the revolver. He had it apart, and he was
cleaning a part of it. The round part, where the loads go; the drum, is
it?"

"Cylinder. How was he cleaning it?" Rand asked.

"He was using a small brush, like a test-tube brush; he was scrubbing out
the holes. The chambers. He was using a solvent that smelled something
like banana-oil."

Rand nodded. He could visualize the progress Fleming had made. If Varcek
was telling the truth, and he remembered what Walters had told him, the
last flicker of possibility that Lane Fleming's death had been accidental
vanished.

"I talked with him for some ten minutes or so," Varcek continued, "about
some technical problems at the plant. All the while, he kept on working
on this revolver, and finished cleaning out the cylinder, and also the
barrel. He was beginning to put the revolver together when I left him and
went up to my laboratory.

"About fifteen minutes later I heard the shot. For a moment, I debated
with myself as to what I had heard, and then I decided to come down here.
But first I had to take a solution off a Bunsen burner, where I had been
heating it, and take the temperature of it, and then wash my hands,
because I had been working with poisonous materials. I should say all
this took me about five minutes.

"When I got down here, the door of this room was closed and locked. That
was most unusual, and I became really worried. I pounded on the door, and
called out, but I got no answer. Then Fred Dunmore came out of the
bathroom attached to his room, with nothing on but a bathrobe. His hair
was wet, and he was in his bare feet and making wet tracks on the floor."

From there on, Varcek's story tallied closely with what Rand had heard
from Gladys and from Walters. Everybody's story tallied, where it could
be checked up on.

"You think the murderer locked the door behind him, when he came out of
here?" Varcek asked.

"I think somebody locked the door, sometime. It might have been the
murderer, or it might have been Fleming at the murderer's suggestion. But
why couldn't the murderer have left the gunroom by that stairway?"

Varcek looked around furtively and lowered his voice. Now he looked like
Rudolf Hess discussing what to do about Ernst Roehm.

"Colonel Rand; don't you think that Fred Dunmore could have shot Lane
Fleming, and then have gone to his room and waited until I came
downstairs?" he asked.

Here we go again! Rand thought. Just like the Rivers case; everybody
putting the finger on everybody else....

"And have undressed and taken a bath, while he was waiting?" he inquired.
"You came down here only five minutes after the shot. In that time,
Dunmore would have had to wipe his fingerprints off the revolver, leave
it in Fleming's hand, put that oily rag in his other hand, set the
deadlatch, cross the hall, undress, get into the bathtub and start
bathing. That's pretty fast work."

"But who else could have done it?"

"Well, you, for one. You could have come down from your lab, shot
Fleming, faked the suicide, and then gone out, locking the door behind
you, and made a demonstration in the hall until you were joined by
Dunmore and the ladies. Then, with your innocence well established, you
could have waited until your wife prompted you, as she or somebody else
was sure to, and then have gone down to the library and up the spiral,"
Rand said. "That's about as convincing, no more and no less, as your
theory about Dunmore."

Varcek agreed sadly. "And I cannot prove otherwise, can I?"

"You can advance your Dunmore theory to establish reasonable doubt," Rand
told him. "And if Dunmore's accused, he can do the same with the theory
I've just outlined. And as long as reasonable doubt exists, neither of
you could be convicted. This isn't the Third Reich or the Soviet Union;
they wouldn't execute both of you to make sure of getting the right one.
Both of you had a motive in this Mill-Pack merger that couldn't have been
negotiated while Fleming lived. One or the other of you may be guilty; on
the other hand, both of you may be innocent."

"Then who...?" Varcek had evidently bet his roll on Dunmore. "There is no
one else who could have done it."

"The garage doors were open, if I recall," Rand pointed out. "Anybody
could have slipped in that way, come through the rear hall to the library
and up the spiral, and have gone out the same way. Some of the French
Maquis I worked with, during the war, could have wiped out the whole
family, one after the other, that way."

A look of intense concentration settled upon Varcek's face. He nodded
several times.

"Yes. Of course," he said, his thought-chain complete. "And you spoke of
motive. From what you must have heard, last evening, Humphrey Goode was
no less interested in the merger than Fred Dunmore or myself. And then
there is your friend Gresham; he is quite familiar with the interior of
this house, and who knows what terms National Milling & Packaging may
have made with him, contingent upon his success in negotiating the
merger?"

"I'm not forgetting either of them," Rand said. "Or Fred Dunmore, or you.
If you did it, I'd advise you to confess now; it'll save everybody,
yourself included, a lot of trouble."

Varcek looked at him, fascinated. "Why, I believe you regard all of us
just as I do my fruit flies!" he said at length. "You know, Colonel Rand,
you are not a comfortable sort of man to have around." He rose slowly.
"Naturally, I'll not mention this interview. I suppose you won't want to,
either?"

"I'd advise you not to talk about it, at that," Rand said. "The situation
here seems to be very delicate, and rather explosive.... Oh, as you go
out, I'd be obliged to you for sending Walters up here. I still have this
work here, and I'll need his help."

After Varcek had left him, Rand looked in the desk drawer, verifying his
assumption that the .38 he had seen there was gone. He wondered where his
own was, at the moment.

When the butler arrived, he was put to work bringing pistols to the desk,
carrying them back to the racks, taking measurements, and the like. All
the while, Rand kept his eye on the head of the spiral stairway.

Finally he caught a movement, and saw what looked like the top of a
peak-crowned gray felt hat between the spindles of the railing. He eased
the Detective Special out of its holster and got to his feet.

"All right!" he sang out. "Come on up!"

Walters looked, obviously startled, at the revolver that had materialized
in Rand's hand, and at the two men who were emerging from the spiral. He
was even more startled, it seemed, when he realized that they wore the
uniform of the State Police.

"What.... What's the meaning of this, sir?" he demanded of Rand.

"You're being arrested," Rand told him. "Just stand still, now."

He stepped around the desk and frisked the butler quickly, wondering
if he were going to find a .25 Webley & Scott automatic or his own
.38-Special. When he found neither, he holstered his temporary weapon.

"If this is your idea of a joke, sir, permit me to say that it isn't...."

"It's no joke, son," Sergeant McKenna told him. "In this country, a
police-officer doesn't have to recite any incantation before he makes an
arrest, any more than he needs to read any Riot Act before he can start
shooting, but it won't hurt to warn you that anything you say can be used
against you."

"At least, I must insist upon knowing why I am being arrested," Walters
said icily.

"Oh! Don't you know?" McKenna asked. "Why, you're being arrested for the
murder of Arnold Rivers."

For a moment the butler retained his professional glacial disdain, and
then the bottom seemed to drop suddenly out of him. Rand suppressed a
smile at this minor verification of his theory. Walters had been
expecting to be accused of larceny, and was prepared to treat the charge
with contempt. Then he had realized, after a second or so, what the State
Police sergeant had really said.

"Good God, gentlemen!" He looked from Mick McKenna to Corporal Kavaalen
to Rand and back again in bewilderment. "You surely can't mean that!"

"We can and we do," Rand told him. "You stole about twenty-five pistols
from this collection, after Mr. Fleming died, and sold them to Arnold
Rivers. Then, when I came here and started checking up on the
collection, you knew the game was up. So, last evening, you took out the
station-wagon and went to see Rivers, and you killed him to keep him from
turning state's evidence and incriminating you. Or maybe you killed him
in a quarrel over the division of the loot. I hope, for your sake, that
it was the latter; if it was, you may get off with second degree murder.
But if you can't prove that there was no premeditation, you're tagged for
the electric chair."

"But ... But I didn't kill Mr. Rivers," Walters stammered. "I barely knew
the gentleman. I saw him, once or twice, when he was here to see Mr.
Fleming, but outside of that...."

"Outside of that, you sold him about twenty-five of these pistols, and
got a like number of junk pistols from him, for replacements." He took
the list Pierre Jarrett and Stephen Gresham had compiled out of his
pocket and began reading: "Italian wheel lock pistol, late sixteenth- or
early seventeenth-century; pair Italian snaphaunce pistols, by Lazarino
Cominazo...." He finished the list and put it away. "I think we've missed
one or two, but that'll do, for the time."

"But I didn't sell those pistols to Mr. Rivers," Walters expostulated. "I
sold them to Mr. Carl Gwinnett. I can prove it!"

That Rand had not expected. "Go on!" he jeered. "I suppose you have
receipts for all of them. Fences always do that, of course."

"But I did sell them to Mr. Gwinnett. I can take you to his house, if you
get a search warrant, and show you where he has them hidden in the
garret. He was afraid to offer them for sale until after this collection
had been broken up and sold; he still has every one of them."

McKenna spat out an obscenity. "Aren't we ever going to have any luck?"
he demanded. "Jarrett out on a writ this morning, and now this!"

"But he ain't in the clear," Kavaalen argued. "Maybe he didn't sell
Rivers the pistols, but maybe he did kill him."

"Dope!" McKenna abused his subordinate. "If he didn't sell Rivers the
pistols, why would he kill him?"

"He's only said he sold them to Gwinnett," Rand pointed out. Then he
turned to Walters. "Look here; if we find those pistols in Gwinnett's
possession, you're clear on this murder charge. There's still a slight
matter of larceny, but that doesn't involve the electric chair. You take
my advice and make a confession now, and then accompany these officers to
Gwinnett's place and show them the pistols. If you do that, you may
expect clemency on the theft charge, too."

"Oh, I will, sir! I'll sign a full confession, and take these
police-officers and show them every one of the pistols...."

Rand put paper and carbon sheets in the typewriter. As Walters dictated,
he typed; the butler listed every pistol which Gresham and Pierre Jarrett
had found missing, and a cased presentation pair of .44 Colt 1860's that
nobody had missed. He signed the triplicate copies willingly; he didn't
seem to mind signing himself into jail, as long as he thought he was
signing himself out of the electric chair.

The book in which Fleming had recorded his pistols he still had; he had
removed it from the gunroom and was keeping it in his room. He said he
would get it, along with the things he would need to take to jail with
him. When it was finished, they all went down the spiral stairway into
the library.

Nelda was standing at the foot of it. Evidently she had been listening to
what had been going on upstairs.

"You dirty sneak!" she yelled, catching sight of Walters. "After all
we've done for you, you turn around and rob us! I hope they give you
twenty years!"

Walters turned to McKenna. "Sergeant, I am willing to accept the penalty
of the law for what I have done, but I don't believe, sir, that it
includes being yapped at by this vulgar bitch."

Nelda let out an inarticulate howl of fury and sprang at him, nails
raking. Corporal Kavaalen caught her wrist before she could claw the
prisoner.

"That's enough, you!" he told her. "You stop that, or you'll spend a
night in jail yourself."

She jerked her arm loose from his grasp and flung out of the library. As
she went out, Gladys entered; Rand, who had been bringing up in the rear,
stepped down from the stairway.

"He confessed," he said softly. "We had to bluff it out of him, but he
came across. Sold the pistols to Carl Gwinnett. We're going, now, to pick
up Gwinnett and the pistols."

"I'm glad you found the pistols," she told him. "But what're we going to
do, over the week-end, for a butler...."

Rand snapped his fingers. "Dammit, I never thought of that!" He allowed
his brow to furrow with thought. "I won't promise anything, but I may be
able to dig up somebody for you, for a day or so. Some of my friends are
visiting their son, in a Naval hospital on the West Coast, and their
butler may be glad for a chance to pick up a little extra money. Shall
I call him and find out?"

"Oh, Colonel Rand, would you? I'd be eternally grateful!"

It was just as easy as that.




CHAPTER 18


Dave Ritter, driving his small coupé, kept his eye on the white State
Police car ahead. Rand, who had come away from the Fleming home in the
white car, had called Ritter from the office of the Justice of the Peace
while waiting for Walters to put up bail, after his hearing. Now, en
route to Gwinnett's, he was briefing his assistant on what had happened.

"So everything's set," he concluded. "Mrs. Fleming jumped at it; she
knows you're coming in your own car, which you may keep in the garage
there. You've left New Belfast about now; if you show up around three,
you'll be safe on the driving time. Your name is Davies; I decided on
that in case I suffer a _lapsus linguæ_ and call you Dave in front of
somebody."

"Yeah. I'll have to watch and not call you Jeff, Colonel Rand, sir." He
nodded toward the glove-box. "That Leech & Rigdon's in there; you'd
better get it out before I go to the Flemings'. The guy at the drive-in
made a positive identification; it's the one he sold Fleming. I saw the
rest of the pistols he has there; don't waste time looking him up about
them. They stink. And I saw Tip this morning. He got young Jarrett sprung
on a writ." He thought for a moment. "What does this do to the Rivers and
Fleming murders?"

"We can look for one man for both jobs, now," Rand said. "Probably the
motive for Fleming was that merger he was so violently opposed to, and
the Rivers killing must have been a security measure of some sort. There;
that must be Gwinnett's, now."

The State Police car had pulled up in front of a large three-story frame
house with faded and discolored paint and jigsaw scrollwork around the
cornices, standing among a clump of trees beside the road. McKenna and
Kavaalen got out, with Walters between them, and started up the path to
the front steps. Ritter stopped behind the white sedan, and he and Rand
got out. By that time, Walters and the two policemen were on the front
porch.

Suddenly Ritter turned and sprinted around the right side of the house.
Rand stood looking after him for a moment, then started to follow more
slowly; as he did, a shot slammed in the rear. Jerking out the changeling
.38-special, he whirled and ran around the left side of the house,
arriving at the rear in time to see Gwinnett standing on a boardwalk
between the house and the stable-garage behind, with his hands raised.
There was a fresh bullet-scar on the boardwalk at his feet. Ritter was
covering him from the corner of the house with the .380 Beretta.

Rand strolled over to Gwinnett, frisked him, and told him to put his
hands down.

"Nice, Dave," he complimented. "I thought of that, too, about a minute
too late. As soon as he saw Walters coming up the walk with the police,
he knew what had happened. Come on, Gwinnett; we'll go through the house
and let them in."

Gwinnett's eyes darted from side to side, like the eyes of a trapped
animal. "I don't know what you're talking about," he said, stiff-lipped.
"What is this, a stick-up?"

Nobody bothered to tell him to stop kidding. They marched him through the
kitchen, where a Negro girl, her arms white with flour, was dithering in
fright, and into the front hall. A woman in a faded housedress had just
admitted the two officers and the former Fleming butler.

"You goddam rat!" Gwinnett yelled at Walters, as soon as he saw him.

"For God's sake, Carl," the woman begged. "Don't make things any worse
than they are. Keep quiet!"

"All right, Gwinnett," McKenna said. "We're arresting you: receiving
stolen goods, and accessory to larceny. We have a search warrant. Want to
see it?"

"So you have a search warrant," Gwinnett said. "So go ahead and search;
if you don't find anything, you'll plant something. I want to call my
lawyer."

"That's your right," McKenna told him. "Aarvo, take him to a phone; let
him call the White House if he wants to." He turned to Walters. "Now,
where would he have this stuff stashed?"

"In the garret, sir. I know the way."

As Kavaalen accompanied Gwinnett to the phone, Walters started upstairs.
Rand and McKenna followed, with Mrs. Gwinnett bringing up the rear.
During the search of the attic, she stood to one side, watching the
ex-butler dig into a pile of pistols.

"This is one, gentlemen," Walters said, producing a Springfield 1818
Model flintlock. "And here is the Walker Colt, and the .40-caliber Colt
Paterson, and the Hall...."

Eventually, he had them all assembled, including the five cased sets.
Rand found a couple of empty bushel baskets and laid the pistols in them,
between layers of old newspapers. He picked up one, and McKenna took the
other, while Walters piled the five flat hardwood cases into his arms
like cordwood. Still saying nothing, her eyes stony with hatred, the
woman followed them downstairs.

The rest of the afternoon was consumed with formalities. Gwinnett was
given a hearing, at which he was represented by a lawyer straight out
of a B-grade gangster picture. Rand had a heated argument with an
over-zealous Justice of the Peace, who wanted to impound the pistols and
jackknife-mark them for identification, but after hurling bloodthirsty
threats of a damage suit for an astronomical figure, he managed to retain
possession of the recovered weapons.

Ritter left at a little past three, to report for duty in the Fleming
household. Rand rode with McKenna and Kavaalen to the State Police
substation, where the pistols were transferred to McKenna's personal car,
in which they and Rand were to be transported back to the Fleming place.

It was five o'clock before Rand had finished telling the sergeant and the
corporal everything he felt they ought to know.

"When we get to the Flemings', I'll give you that revolver I got from the
coroner," he finished. "One of your boys can take it to this fellow
Umholtz, and get him to identify it. You might also show it to young
Gillis, and see what he knows about it. Gillis might even give you a name
for who got it from Rivers. I'm not building any hopes on that, and the
reason I'm not is that Gillis is still alive. If he knew, I don't think
he would be."

"Yeah. I can see that," McKenna nodded. "Fact is, I can see everything,
now, except one thing. This pistol-switch somebody gave you; what's the
idea of that?"

"Why, that's because I'm on the spot," Rand told him. "I'm to be killed,
and somebody else is to be killed along with me. The .25 automatic will
be used on me, and the .38 will be used on the other fellow, and we'll be
found dead about five feet apart, and I'll be holding my own gun, and the
other fellow will be holding the .25, and it will look as though we shot
it out and scored a double knockout. That way, my mouth will be shut
about what I've learned since I came here, and the man who's supposed to
have killed me will take the rap for Fleming and Rivers both. Nothing to
stop an investigation like a couple of corpses who can't tell their own
story and can take the blame for everything."

"_Zhee-zus!_" Kavaalen's eyes widened. "That must be just it!"

"Well, you got your nerve about you, I'll say that," McKenna commented.
"You sit there and talk about it like it was something that was going to
happen to Joe Doakes and Oscar Zilch." He looked at Rand intently. "You
want us to keep an eye on you?"

Rand leaned over and spat into the brass cuspidor, a gesture of
braggadocio he had picked up among the French maquis.

"Hell, no! That's the last thing I do want!" he said. "I want him to try
it. You realize, don't you, that all this is pure assumption and theory?
We don't have a single fact, as it stands, that proves anything. We could
go and pick this fellow up, and he's one of three men, so we could grab
all three of them, and even if we found the .25 Webley & Scott and my .38
in his pockets, we couldn't charge him with anything. Fact is, right now
we can't even prove that Lane Fleming's death was anything but the
accident it's on the books as being. But let him take a shot at me...."

"And then you'll have another nice, clear case of self-defense." McKenna
frowned. "Goddammit, Jeff, you've had to defend yourself too many times,
already. This'll be--well, how many will it be?"

"Counting Germans?" Rand grinned. "Hell, I don't know; I can't remember
all of them."

"One thing," Kavaalen said solemnly, "you never hear of any lawyers
springing people out of cemeteries on writs."

"Look, Jeff," McKenna said, at length. "If it's the way you think, this
guy won't dare kill you instantly, will he? Seems to me, the way the
script reads, this other guy shoots you, and you shoot back and kill him,
and then you die. Isn't that it?"

Rand nodded. "I'm banking on that. He'll try to give me a fatal but not
instantly fatal wound, and that means he'll have to take time to pick his
spot. The reason I've managed to survive these people against whom I've
had to defend myself has been that I just don't give a damn where I shoot
a man. A lot of good police officers have gotten themselves killed
because they tried to wing somebody and took a second or so longer about
shooting than they should have."

"Something in that, too," McKenna agreed. "But what I'm getting at is
this: I think I know a way to give you a little more percentage." He
rose. "Wait a minute; I'll be right back."




CHAPTER 19


There was less feuding at dinner that evening than at any previous meal
Rand had eaten in the Fleming home. In the first place, everybody seemed
a little awed in the presence of the new butler, who flitted in and out
of the room like a ghost and, when spoken to, answered in a heavy B.B.C.
accent. Then, the women, who carried on most of the hostilities, had
re-erected their _front populaire_ and were sharing a common pleasure in
the recovery of the stolen pistols. And finally, there was a distinct
possibility that the swift and dramatic justice that had overtaken
Walters and Gwinnett at Rand's hands was having a sobering effect upon
somebody at that table.

Dunmore, Nelda, Varcek, Geraldine and Gladys had been intending to
go to a party that evening, but at the last minute Gladys had pleaded
indisposition and telephoned regrets. The meal over, Rand had gone
up to the gunroom, Gladys drifted into the small drawing-room off the
dining-room, and the others had gone to their rooms to dress.

Rand was taking down the junk with which Walters had infiltrated the
collection and was listing and hanging up the recovered items when Fred
Dunmore, wearing a dressing-gown, strolled in.

"I can't get over the idea of Walters being a thief," he sorrowed.
"I wouldn't have believed it if I hadn't seen his signed
confession.... Well, it just goes to show you...."

"He took his medicine standing up," Rand said. "And he helped us recover
the pistols. If I were you, I'd go easy with him."

Dunmore shook his head. "I'm not a revengeful man, Colonel Rand," he
said, "but if there's one thing I can't forgive, it's a disloyal
employee." His mouth closed sternly around his cigar. "He'll have to take
what's coming to him." He stood by the desk for a moment, looking down at
the recovered items and the pile of junk on the floor. "When did you
first suspect him?"

"Almost from the first moment I saw this collection." Rand explained the
reasoning which had led him to suspect Walters. "The real clincher, to my
mind, was the fact that he knew this collection almost as well as Lane
Fleming did, and wouldn't be likely to be deceived by these substitutions
any more than Fleming would. Yet he said nothing to anybody; neither to
Mrs. Fleming, nor Goode, nor myself. If he weren't guilty himself, I
wanted to know his reason for keeping silent. So I put the pressure on
him, and he cracked open."

"Well, I want you to know how grateful we all are," Dunmore said
feelingly. "I'm kicking hell out of myself, now, about the way I objected
when Gladys brought you in here. My God, suppose we'd tried to sell the
collection ourselves! Anybody who'd have been interested in buying would
have seen what you saw, and then they'd have claimed that we were trying
to hold out on them." He hesitated. "You've seen how things are here," he
continued ruefully. "And that's something else I have to thank you for; I
mean, keeping your mouth shut till you got the pistols back. There'd have
been a hell of a row; everybody would have blamed everybody else.... How
did you get him to confess, though?"

Rand told him about the subterfuge of the trumped-up murder charge.
Dunmore had evidently never thought of that hoary device; he chuckled
appreciatively.

"Say, that _was_ smart! No wonder he was so willing to admit everything
and help you get them back." He looked at the pistols on the desk and
moved one or two of them. "Did you get the one the coroner had? Goode
said something--"

"Oh, yes; I got that yesterday." Rand turned and went to the workbench,
bringing back the Leech & Rigdon, which he handed to Dunmore. "That's it.
I fired out the other five charges, and cleaned it at the State Police
substation." He watched Dunmore closely, but there seemed to be no
reaction.

"So that's it." Dunmore looked at it with a show of interest and honest
sorrow, and handed it back, then shifted his cigar across his mouth.
"Look here, Colonel; I've been wanting to ask you something. Did Gladys
just get you to come here to appraise and sell the collection, or are you
investigating Lane's death, too?"

"Well, now, you're asking me to be disloyal to my employer," Rand
objected. "Why don't you ask her that? If she wants you to know, she'll
tell you."

"Dammit, I can't! Suppose she's satisfied that it really was an accident;
would I want to start her worrying and imagining things?"

"No, I suppose you wouldn't," Rand conceded. "You're not at all satisfied
on that point yourself, are you?"

"Well, are you?" Dunmore parried.

That sort of fencing could go on indefinitely. Rand determined to stop
it. After all, if Dunmore was the murderer of Lane Fleming, he would
already know how little Rand was deceived by the fake accident; the Leech
& Rigdon had told him that already. If he weren't, telling him would do
no harm at this point, and might even do some good.

"Why, I think Fleming was murdered," Rand told him, as casually as though
he were expressing an opinion on tomorrow's weather. "And I further
believe that whoever killed Fleming also killed Arnold Rivers. That, by
the way, is where I come in. Stephen Gresham has retained me to find the
Rivers murderer; to do that, I must first learn who killed Lane Fleming.
However, I was not retained to investigate the Fleming murder, and as far
as I know from anything she has told me, Gladys Fleming is quite
satisfied that her husband shot himself accidentally." In a universe of
ordered abstractions and multiordinal meanings, the literal truth, on one
order of abstraction, was often a black lie on another. "Does that answer
your question?" he asked, with open-faced innocence.

Dunmore nodded. "Yes, I get it, now. Look here, do you think Anton Varcek
could have done it? I know it's a horrible idea, and I want you to
understand that I'm not making any accusations, but we always took it for
granted that he'd been up in his lab, and had come downstairs when he
heard the shot. But suppose he came down and shot Fleming, and then went
out in the hall, and made that rumpus outside after locking the door
behind him?"

"That's possible," Rand agreed. "You were taking a bath when you heard
the shot, weren't you?"

Dunmore shook his head. "I suppose so. I didn't hear any shot, to tell
the truth. All I heard was Anton pounding on the door and yelling. I
suppose I had my head under the shower, and the noise of the water kept
me from hearing the shot." He stopped short, taking his cigar from his
mouth and pointing it at Rand. "And, by God, that would have been about
five minutes before he started hammering on the door!" he exclaimed.
"Time enough for him to have fixed things to look like an accident, set
the deadlatch, and have gone out in the hall, and started making a noise.
And another thing. You say that whoever killed Lane also killed this
fellow Rivers. Well, on Thursday night, when Rivers was killed, Anton
didn't get home till around twelve."

"Yes, I'd thought of that. You know, though, that the murderer doesn't
have to be Varcek, or anybody else who was in the house at the time. The
garage doors were open--I'm told that your wife was out at the time--and
anybody could have sneaked in the back way, up through the library, and
out the same way. There are one or two possibilities besides you and
Anton Varcek."

Dunmore's eyes widened. "Yes, and I can think of one, without half
trying, too!" He nodded once or twice. "For instance, the man who was
afraid you were investigating Fleming's death; the man who started that
suicide story!" He looked at Rand interrogatively. "Well, I got to go;
Nelda'll be out of the bathroom by now. I want to talk to you about this
some more, Colonel."

After Dunmore had gone out, Rand mopped his face. The room seemed
insufferably hot. He found an electric fan over the workbench and plugged
it in, but it made enough noise to cover any sounds of stealthy approach,
and he shut it off. He had finished revising his list to include the
recovered pistols for as far as it was completed, and was hanging them
back on the wall when Ritter came in.

"House is clear, now," his assistant said, stepping out of his P. G.
Wodehouse character. "Both pairs left in the Packard, Dunmore driving.
Man, what a cat-and-dog show this place is! It's a wonder our client
isn't nuts."

"You haven't seen anything; you ought to have been here last
night ... Where is our client, by the way?"

"Downstairs." Ritter fished a cigarette out of his livery and
appropriated Rand's lighter. "If we hear her coming, you can grab this."
He brushed a couple of Paterson Colts to one side and sat down on the
edge of the desk, taking a deep drag on the cigarette. "What's the
regular law doing, now that young Jarrett is out?"

"I had a long talk with Mick McKenna," Rand said. "Fortunately, Mick and
I have worked together before. I was able to tell him the facts of life,
and he'll be a good boy now. When last heard from, Farnsworth was
beginning to blow his hot breath on the back of Cecil Gillis's neck."

Ritter picked up the big .44 Colt Walker and tried the balance. "Man,
this even makes that Colt Magnum of mine feel light!" he said. "Say,
Jeff, if Farnsworth's going after Gillis, it's probably on account of
those stories about him and Mrs. Rivers. At least, all that stuff would
come out if he arrested him. Maybe we could get a fee out of Mrs.
Rivers."

"I'd thought of that. Unfortunately, Mrs. Rivers had a very convenient
breakdown, when she heard the news; she is now in a hospital in New York,
and won't be back until after the funeral. Prostrated with grief. Or
something. And this case is due to blow up like Hiroshima before then.
Well, we can't get fees from everybody." That, of course, was one of the
sad things of life to which one must reconcile oneself. "I got a call
from Pierre Jarrett; Tip's staying at the Jarrett place tonight. I
thought it would be a good idea to have him within reach for a while."

The private outside phone rang shrilly. Ritter let it go for several
rings, then picked it up.

"This is the Fleming residence," he stated, putting on his character
again. "Oh, yes indeed, sir. Colonel Rand is right here, sir; I'll tell
him you're calling." He put a hand over the mouthpiece. "Humphrey Goode."

Rand took the phone and named himself into it.

"I would like to talk to you privately, Colonel Rand," the lawyer said.
"On a subject of considerable importance to our, shall I say, mutual
clients. Could you find time to drop over, sometime this evening?"

"Well, I'm very busy, at the moment, Mr. Goode," Rand regretted. "There
have been some rather deplorable developments here, lately. The butler,
Walters, has been arrested for larceny. It seems that since Mr. Fleming's
death, he has been systematically looting the pistol-collection. I'm
trying to get things straightened out, now."

"Good heavens!" Goode was considerably shaken. "When did you discover
this, Colonel Rand? And why wasn't I notified before? And are there many
valuable items missing?"

"I discovered it as soon as I saw the collection," Rand began answering
his questions in order. "Neither you, nor anybody else was notified,
because I wanted to get evidence to justify an arrest first. And nothing
is missing; everything has been recovered," he finished. "That's what I'm
so busy about, now; getting my list revised, and straightening out the
collection."

"Oh, fine!" Goode was delighted. "I hope everything was handled quietly,
without any unnecessary publicity? But this other matter; I don't care to
go into it over the phone, and it's imperative that we discuss it
privately, at once."

"Well, suppose you come over here, Mr. Goode," Rand suggested. "That way,
I won't have to interrupt my work so much. There's nobody at home now but
Mrs. Fleming, and as she's indisposed, we'll be quite alone."

"Oh; very well. I think that's really a good idea; much better than your
coming over here. I'll see you directly."

Ritter was grinning as Rand hung up. "That's the stuff," he approved.
"The old Hitler technique; make them come to you, and then you can pound
the table and yell at them all you want to."

"You go let him in," Rand directed. "Show him up here, and then take a
plant on that spiral stairway out of the library, just out of sight. I
don't think this it, but there's no use taking chances." He mopped his
face again. "Damn, it's hot in here!"

Ten minutes later, Ritter ushered in Humphrey Goode, and inquired if
there would be anything further, sir? When Rand said there wouldn't, he
went down the spiral. Just as Rand had expected, Goode began peddling
the same line as Varcek and Dunmore before him. They all came to see him
in the gunroom with a common purpose. After easing himself into a chair,
and going through some prefatory huffing and puffing, Goode came out with
it. Did Rand believe that Lane Fleming had really been murdered, and was
he investigating Fleming's death, after all?

"I have always believed that Lane Fleming was murdered," Rand replied.
"I also believe that his murderer killed Arnold Rivers, as well. I am
investigating the Rivers murder, and the Fleming murder may be considered
as a part thereof. But what brings you around to discuss that, now? Did
you learn something, since last evening, that leads you to suspect the
same thing?"

"Well, not exactly. But this afternoon, Fred Dunmore and Anton Varcek
came to my office, separately, of course, and each of them wanted to know
if I had any reason to suspect that the, uh, tragedy, was actually a case
of murder. Both had the impression that you were conducting an
investigation under cover of your work on the pistol collection, and
wanted to know whether Mrs. Fleming or I had employed you to do so."

"And you denied it, giving them the impression that Mrs. Fleming had?"
Rand asked. "I hope you haven't put her in any more danger than she is
now, by doing so."

Goode looked startled. "Colonel Rand! Do you actually mean that...?" he
began.

"You were Lane Fleming's attorney, and board chairman of his company,"
Rand said. "You can probably imagine why he was killed. You can ask
yourself just how safe his principal heir is now." Without giving Goode
a chance to gather his wits, he pressed on: "Well, what's your opinion
about Fleming's death? After all, you did go out of your way to create
a false impression that he had committed suicide."

Goode, still bewildered by Rand's deliberately cryptic hints and a little
frightened, had the grace to blush at that.

"I admit it; it was entirely unethical, and I'll admit that, too," he
said. "But.... Well, I'm buying all the Premix stock that's out in small
blocks, and so are Mr. Dunmore and Mr. Varcek. We all felt that such
rumors would reduce the market quotation, to our advantage."

Rand nodded. "I picked up a hundred shares, the other day, myself. Your
shenanigans probably chipped a little off the price I had to pay, so I
ought to be grateful to you. But we're talking about murder, not market
manipulation. Did either Varcek or Dunmore express any opinion as to who
might have killed Fleming?"

The outside telephone rang before Goode could answer. Rand scooped it up
at the end of the first ring and named himself into it. It was Mick
McKenna calling.

"Well, we checked up on that cap-and-ball six-shooter you left with me,"
he said. "This gunsmith, Umholtz, refinished it for Rivers last summer.
He showed the man who was to see him the entry in his job-book: make,
model, serials and all."

"Oh, fine! And did you get anything out of young Gillis?" Rand asked.

"The gun was in Rivers's shop from the time Umholtz rejuvenated it till
around the first of November. Then it was sold, but he doesn't know who
to. He didn't sell it himself; Rivers must have."

"I assumed that; that's why he's still alive. Well, thanks, Mick. The
case is getting tighter every minute."

"You haven't had any trouble yet?" McKenna asked anxiously. "How's the
whoozis doing?"

"About as you might expect," Rand told him, mopping his face again.
"Thanks for that, too."

He hung up and turned back to Goode. "Pardon the interruption," he said.
"Sergeant McKenna, of the State Police. The officer who made the arrest
on Walters and Gwinnett. Well, I suppose Dunmore and Varcek are each
trying to blame the other," he said.

"Well, yes; I rather got that impression," Goode admitted.

"And which one do you like for the murderer? Or haven't you picked yours,
yet?"

"You mean.... Yes, of course," Goode said slowly. "It must have been one
or the other. But I can't think.... It's horrible to have to suspect
either of them." For a moment, he stared unseeingly at the litter of
high-priced pistols on the desk. Then:

"Colonel Rand, Lane Fleming is dead, and nothing either of us can do
will bring him back. To expose his murderer certainly won't. But it
would cause a scandal that would rock the Premix Company to its very
foundations. It might even disastrously affect the market as a whole."

"Oh, come!" Rand reproved. "That's like talking about starting a
hurricane with a palm-leaf fan."

"But you will admit that it would have a dreadful effect on Premix
Foods," Goode argued. "It would probably prevent this merger from being
consummated. Look here," he said urgently. "I don't know how much Gladys
Fleming is paying you to rake all this up, but I'll gladly double her fee
if you drop it and confine yourself to the matter of the collection."

Even in his colossal avarice, that was one kind of money Jeff Rand had
never been tempted to take. An offer of that sort invariably made him
furious. At the moment, he managed to choke down his anger, but he
rejected Goode's offer in a manner which left no room for further
discussion. Goode rose, shaking his head sadly.

"I suppose you realize," he said, sorrowfully, "that you're wrecking
a ten-million-dollar corporation. One in which you, yourself, are a
stockholder."

Rand brightened. "And the biggest wrecking jobs I ever did before were a
couple of petrol dumps and a railroad bridge." He got to his feet along
with the lawyer. "No need to call the butler; I'll let you out myself."

He accompanied Goode down the front stairway to the door. Goode was still
gloomy.

"I made a mistake in trying to bribe you," he said. "But can't I appeal
to your sense of fairness? Do you want to inflict serious losses on
innocent investors merely to avenge one crime?"

"I don't approve of murder," Rand told him. "Least of all, to paraphrase
Clausewitz, as an extension of business by other means. You know, if we
let Lane Fleming's killer get away with it, somebody might take that as a
precedent and bump you off to win a lawsuit, sometime. Ever think of
that?"

When he returned to the gunroom, he found Gladys Fleming occupying the
chair lately vacated by the family attorney. She blew a smoke-ring at him
in greeting as he entered.

"Now what was Hump Goode up to?" she wanted to know.

"I'm taking too much on myself," Rand evaded. "Maybe I should have turned
Walters over for trial by family court-martial. How do you like Davies,
by the way?"

"Oh, he's cute," Gladys told him. "One of your operatives, isn't he?"

"Now what in the world gave you an idea like that?" he asked, as though
humoring the vagaries of a child.

"Well, I suspected something of the sort from the alacrity with which you
produced him, before Walters was out of the house," she said. "And nobody
could be as perfect a stage butler as he is. But what really convinced me
was coming into the library, a little while ago, and finding him
squatting on the top of the spiral, covering Humphrey Goode with a small
but particularly evil-looking automatic."

Rand chuckled. "What did you do?"

"Oh, I climbed up and squatted beside him," she replied. "I got there
just as you were telling Goode what he could do with his bribe. You know,
with one thing and another, Goode's beginning to become unamusing." She
smoked in silence for a moment. "I ought to be indignant with you,
filling my house with spies," she said. "But under the circumstances, I'm
afraid I'm thankful, instead. Your op's a good egg, by the way; he's on
his way to bring us some drinks."

"I ought to be sore at you, retaining me into a mess like this and
telling me nothing," Rand told her. "What was the idea, anyhow? You
wanted me to investigate your husband's murder, all along, didn't you?"

"I--I hadn't a thing to go on," she replied. "I was afraid, if I came out
and told you what I suspected, that you'd think it was just another case
of feminine dam-foolishness, and dismiss it as such. I knew it wasn't an
accident; Lane didn't have accidents with guns. And if he'd wanted to
kill himself, he'd have done it and left a note explaining why he had to.
But I didn't have a single fact to give you. I thought that if you came
here and started working on the collection, you'd find something."

"You should have taken a chance and told me what you suspected," Rand
said. "I've taken a lot of cases on flimsier grounds than this. The fact
is, you practically told me it was murder, when you were talking to me in
my office."

"Jeff, I never was what the soap-operas call being 'in love' with Lane,"
she continued. "But he was wonderful to me. He gave me everything a girl
who grew up in a sixteen-dollar apartment over a fruit store could want.
And then somebody killed him, just as you'd step on a cockroach, because
he got in the way of a business deal. I'm glad to be able to spend money
to help catch whoever did it. It won't help him, but it'll make me feel a
lot better.... You will catch him, won't you?"

Rand nodded. "I don't know whether he'll ever go to trial and be
convicted," he said. "I don't think he will. But you can take my word for
it; he won't get away with it. Tomorrow, I think the lid's going to blow
off. Maybe you'd better be away from home when it does. Take Nelda and
Geraldine with you, and go somewhere. There's likely to be some uproar."

"Well, Nelda and Geraldine and I are going to church, in the morning,"
Gladys said. "It's a question of face. We have a rented pew--Lane was
quite active in church work--and none of us are willing to let ourselves
get squeezed out of it. We all go; even Geraldine manages to drag herself
to the Lord's House through an alcoholic fog. And we'll have to be back
in time for dinner. It would look funny if we weren't."

"Well, if nothing's happened by the time you get back, I want you to talk
the girls into going somewhere with you in the afternoon, and stay away
till evening. And don't get the idea that you could help me here," he
added, stopping an objection. "I know what I'm talking about. The
presence of any of you here would only delay matters and make it harder
for me."

Then Ritter came in, a cigarette in one corner of his mouth, carrying a
tray on which were a bottle of Bourbon, a bottle of Scotch, a siphon and
a couple of bottles of beer.




CHAPTER 20


The dining-room was empty, when Rand came down to breakfast the next
morning. Taking the seat he had occupied the evening before, he waited
until Ritter came out of the kitchen through the pantry.

"Good morning, Colonel Rand," the Perfect Butler greeted him unctuously.
"If I may say so, sir, you're a bit of an early riser. None of the family
is up yet, sir."

Rand jerked a thumb toward the kitchen. "Who's out there?" he hissed.

"Just the cook; frying sausage and flipping pancakes. Premix pancakes, of
course. The maid sleeps out; she hasn't gotten here yet. How'd it go last
night? You put a dummy under the covers and sleep on the floor?"

"No, last night I was safe. The blow-off isn't due till this morning,
when the women are at church, and he'll have to catch me and the fall-guy
together."

"What do you want me to do?" Ritter asked, giving an un-butler-like hitch
at his shoulder-holster. "I can stand on my official dignity, and get out
of any cleaning-up work till after dinner, and I won't have any buttling
to do till the women get home from church."

"Case Varcek and Dunmore, when they come in; see if either of them is
rod-heavy. Find anything, last night?"

Ritter shook his head. "I searched Varcek's lab, after everybody was in
bed, and I searched the cars in the garage, and a lot of other places. I
didn't find them. Whoever he is, the chances are he has them in his
room."

"Did you look back of the books in the library?" Rand asked. When Ritter
shook his head, he continued: "That's probably where they are. Not that
it makes a whole lot of difference."

"If I'd found them, it'd of given me something to watch; then I'd know
when the fun was going to start." Ritter broke off suddenly. "Yes, sir.
Will you have your coffee now, or later, sir?"

Gladys entered, wearing the blue tailored outfit she had worn to Rand's
office, on Wednesday.

"At ease, at ease," she laughed, dropping into her chair. "Anything new?"

Rand shook his head. "We'll have to wait. I'm expecting some action this
morning; I hope it'll be over before you're home from church."

She looked at him seriously. "Jeff, you're using yourself as
murder-bait," she said. "Aren't you?"

"More or less. He knows I'm onto him. He's pretty sure I haven't any real
proof, yet, but he doesn't know how soon I will have. He realizes that
I'm cat-and-mousing him, the way I did Walters. So he'll try to kill me
before I pounce, and when he does, he'll convict himself. What he doesn't
realize is that as long as he sits tight, he's perfectly safe."

Neither of them mentioned the obvious corollary, that conviction and
execution would be almost simultaneous. It must have been uppermost in
Gladys's mind; she leaned over and put her hand on Rand's arm.

"Jeff, would it help any if I stayed home, instead of going to church?"
she asked. "I'm a pretty fair pistol-shot. Lane taught me. I can stay
over ninety at slow fire, and in the eighties at timed-and-rapid. If I
hid somewhere with a target pistol--"

"Absolutely not!" Rand vetoed emphatically. "I'm not saying that because
I'm afraid you might stop a slug yourself. You're a big girl, now; you
can take your own chances. But if you stayed home, he wouldn't make a
move. You and Geraldine and Nelda have to be out of the house before
he'll feel safe coming out of the grass."

"Watch it!" Ritter warned. "Yes, ma'am; at once, ma'am."

Nelda came in and sat down. Ritter held her chair and fussed over her,
finding out what she wanted to eat. He was bringing in her fruit when
Varcek and Geraldine entered. Nelda was inquiring if Rand wanted to come
to church with them.

"No; I'm one of the boys the chaplain couldn't find in the foxholes,"
Rand said. "I'm going to put in a quiet morning on the collection. If
nobody gets murdered or arrested in the meantime, that is."

Geraldine looked woebegone; her hands were trembling. "My God, do I have
a hangover!" she moaned. "Walters, for heaven's sake, fix me up
something, quick!" Then she saw Ritter. "Who the devil are you?" she
demanded. "Where's Walters?"

"Out on bail," Rand told her. "Don't you remember?"

"Oh, you did this to me!" she accused. "Walters could always fix me up,
in the morning. Now what am I going to do?"

"You might stop drinking," her husband suggested mildly.

"Oh, just stop breathing; that would be better all around," Nelda
interposed.

Ritter coughed delicately. "Begging your pardon, ma'am, but I've always
rawther fawncied myself for an expert on morning-awfter tonics. If you'll
wait a moment--"

He departed on his errand of mercy, returning shortly with a highball
glass filled with some dark, evil-looking potion. He set it on the table
in front of the sufferer and poured her a cup of coffee.

"Now, ma'am; just try this. Take it gradually, if I may suggest. Don't
attempt to gulp it; it's quite strong, ma'am."

Geraldine tasted it and pulled a Gorgon-face. Encouraged by Ritter, she
managed to down about half of the mixture.

"Splendid, ma'am; splendid!" he cheered her on. "Now, drink your coffee,
ma'am, and then finish it. That's right, ma'am. And now, more coffee."

Geraldine struggled through with the black draft and drank the second cup
of coffee. As she set down the empty cup, she even managed to smile.

"Why, that's wonderful!" She lit a cigarette. "What is it? I feel as
though I might live, after all."

"A recipe of my own, a variant on the old Prairie Oyster, but without the
raw egg, which I consider a needless embellishment, ma'am. I learned it
in the household of a former employer, a New York stockbroker. Poor man:
he did himself in in the autumn of 1929."

"Well, it's too bad you won't be with us permanently, Davies," Nelda
said. "Your recipe seems to be just what Geraldine needs. With a dash of
prussic acid added, of course."

That got the bush-fighting off to a good start. When Dunmore came in, a
few minutes later, the two sisters were stalking one another through the
jungle, blow-gunning poison darts back and forth. The newcomer sat down
without a word; throughout the meal, he and Varcek treated one another
with silent and hostile suspicion. Finally Gladys looked at her watch and
called a truce to the skirmishing by announcing that it was time to start
for church. Rand left the room with the ladies; in the hall, Gladys
brushed against him quickly and gripped his left arm.

"Do be careful, Jeff," she whispered.

"Don't worry; I will," Rand assured her. Then he turned into the library
and went up the spiral to the gunroom, while the three women went down to
the garage.

He was standing at the window as the big Packard moved out onto the
drive. Nelda was at the wheel, and Gladys, beside her on the front seat,
raised a white-gloved hand in the thumbs-up salute. Rand gave it back,
and watched the car swing around the house. Then he mopped his face with
a wad of Kleenex and went over to the room-temperature thermostat,
turning it down to sixty.

Sitting down at the desk, he dialed Humphrey Goode's number on the
private outside line. A maid answered; a moment later he was talking to
the Fleming lawyer.

"Rand, here," he identified himself. "Mr. Goode, I've been thinking over
our conversation of last evening. There is a great deal to be said for
the position you're taking in the matter. As you reminded me, I'm a
small, if purely speculative, stockholder in Premix, myself, and even
if I weren't, I should hate to be responsible for undeserved losses by
innocent investors."

"Yes?" Goode's voice fairly shook. "Then you're going to drop the
investigation?"

"No, Mr. Goode; I can't do that. But I believe a formula could be evolved
which would keep the Premix Company and its affairs out of it. In fact, I
think that the whole question of the death of Lane Fleming might possibly
be kept in the background. Would that satisfy you? It would require some
very careful manipulation on my part, and your cooperation."

"But.... See here, if you're investigating the death of Mr. Fleming, how
can that be kept in the background?" Goode wanted to know.

"The murderer of Lane Fleming is also guilty of the murder of Arnold
Rivers," Rand stated. "I know that positively, now. Murder is punished
capitally, and one of the peculiarities of capital punishment is that it
can be inflicted only once, on no matter how many counts. If our man goes
to the chair for the death of Rivers, the death of Fleming might even
remain an accident. I can hardly guarantee that; I have my agency license
to think of, among other things. But I feel reasonably safe in saying
that I could keep the Premix Company from figuring in the case. Would
that satisfy you?"

"It most certainly would, Colonel Rand!" Goode's voice shook even more.
"Are you sure?"

"I'm not sure of anything. It'll cost the Premix Company some money to
get this done--I'll have certain expenses, for one thing, which could not
very gracefully be itemized--and I will have to have your cooperation.
Now, I want you to remain at home, where I can reach you at any moment,
for the rest of the day. I'll call you later."

He listened to Goode babble his gratitude for a while, then terminated
the call and hung up. Then he transferred the Colt .38 to the side pocket
of his coat, picked up one of the sheets on which he had been listing
the collection, and sat for almost fifteen minutes pretending to study
it, keeping his eyes shifting from the hall door to the spiral stairway
and back again.

Finally, the hall door opened, and Anton Varcek came in. Rand half rose,
covering the Czech from his side pocket; Varcek came over and sat down in
an armchair near the desk. He was looking more than ever like Rudolf
Hess. Rudolf Hess on the morning of the Beer Hall Putsch.

"Colonel Rand," he began. "There has, within the last half hour, been a
most important development. I am at a loss to define its significance,
but its importance is inescapable."

Rand nodded. He had been expecting somebody to give birth to an important
development; the steps toward gunfire were progressing in logical series.

"Well?" He smiled encouragingly. "What happened?"

"After you and the ladies left the dining-room," Varcek said, "Fred
Dunmore turned to me and apologized for harboring unjust suspicions of me
in the matter of Lane Fleming's death. He said that he had been unable
to understand who else could have murdered Lane, until you had pointed
out to him that the house could have been entered from the garage, and
the gunroom from the library. Then, he said, he had had a conversation
with some unnamed gentleman at the party last evening, and had learned
that Lane had discovered that Humphrey Goode was deceiving him, and had
been about to have him dismissed from his position with the company, and
to sever his personal connections with him."

"The devil, now!" Rand gave a good imitation of surprise. "What sort of
jiggery-pokery was Goode up to?"

"Fred said that his informant told him that Lane had proof that Goode had
accepted a bribe from Arnold Rivers, to misconduct the suit which Lane
was bringing against Rivers about a pair of pistols he had bought from
Rivers. It seems that Goode was Rivers's attorney, also, and had been
involved with him in a number of dishonest transactions, although the
connection had been kept secret."

"That's a new angle, now," Rand said. "I suppose that he killed Rivers in
order to prevent the latter from incriminating him. Why didn't Fred come
to me with this?" he asked.

"Eh?" Evidently Varcek hadn't thought of that. "Why, I suppose he was
concerned about the possibility of repercussions in the business world.
After all, Goode is our board chairman, and maybe he thought that people
might begin thinking that the murder had some connection with the affairs
of the company."

"That's possible, of course," Rand agreed. "And what's your own
attitude?"

"Colonel Rand, I cannot allow these facts to be suppressed," the Czech
said. "My own position is too vulnerable; you've showed me that. Except
for the fact that somebody could have entered the house through the
garage, the burden of suspicion would lie on me and Fred Dunmore."

"Well, do you want me to help you with it?" Rand asked.

"Yes, if you will. It would be helping yourself, also, I believe," Varcek
replied. "Fred is downstairs, now, in the library; I suggest that you and
I go down and have a talk with him. Maybe you could show him the folly of
trying to suppress any facts concerning Lane's death."

"Yes, that would be both foolish and dangerous." Rand got to his feet,
keeping his hand on the .38 Colt. "Let's go down and talk to him now."

They walked side by side toward the spiral, Rand keeping on the right and
lagging behind a little, lifting the stubby revolver clear of his pocket.
Yet, in spite of his vigilance, it happened before he could prevent it.

A lance of yellow fire jumped out of the shadows of the stairway,
and there was a soft cough of a silenced pistol, almost lost in the
_click-click_ of the breech-action. Rand felt something sledge-hammer him
in the chest, almost knocking him down. He staggered, then swung up the
Colt he had drawn from his pocket and blazed two shots into the stairway.
There was a clatter, and the sound of feet descending into the library.
He rushed forward, revolver poised, and then a shot boomed from below,
followed by three more in quick succession.

"Okay, Jeff!" Ritter's voice called out. "War's over!"

He managed, somehow, to get down the steep spiral. The little .25 Webley
& Scott was lying on the bottom step; he pushed it aside with his foot,
and cautioned Varcek, who was following, to avoid it. Ritter, still
looking like the Perfect Butler in spite of the .380 Beretta in his hand,
was standing in the hall doorway. On the floor, midway between the
stairway and the door, lay Fred Dunmore. His tan coat and vest were
turning dark in several places, and Rand's own Detective Special was
lying a few inches from his left hand.

"He came in here and shut the door," Ritter reported. "I couldn't follow
him in, so I took a plant in the hall. When I heard you blasting
upstairs, I came in, just in time to see him coming down. You winged him
in the right shoulder; he'd dropped the .25, and he had your gat in his
left hand. When he saw mine, he threw one at me and missed; I gave him
three back for it. See result on floor."

"Uh-uh; he'd have gotten away, if you hadn't been on the job," he told
Ritter. Then he picked up his own revolver and holstered it. After a
glance which assured him that Fred Dunmore was beyond any further action
of any sort, he laid the square-butt Detective Special on the floor
beside him. "You did all right, Dave," he said. "Now, nobody's going to
have a chance to bamboozle a jury into acquitting him." He thought of his
recent conversation with Humphrey Goode. "You did just all right," he
repeated.

"So it was Fred, then," he heard Varcek, behind him, say. "Then he was
lying about this evidence against Goode." The Czech came over and stood
beside Rand, looking down at the body of his late brother-in-law. "But
why did he tell me that story, and why did he shoot at us when we were
together?"

"Both for the same general reason." Rand explained about the two pistols
and the planned double-killing. "With both of us dead, you'd be the
murderer, and I'd be a martyr to law-and-order, and he'd be in the
clear."

Varcek regarded the dead man with more distaste than surprise. Evidently
his experiences in Hitler's Europe had left him with few illusions about
the sanctity of human life or the extent of human perfidy. Ritter
holstered the Beretta and got out a cigarette.

"I hope you didn't leave your lighter upstairs," he told Rand.

Rand produced and snapped it, holding the flame out to his assistant.
"Dave," he lectured, "the Perfect Butler always has a lighter in good
working order; lighting up the mawster is part of his duties. Remember
that, the next time you have a buttling job."

Ritter leaned forward for the light. "Dunmore was a better shot with his
right hand than he was with his left," he commented. "He didn't come
within a yard of me, and he scored a twelve-o'clock center on you. Right
through the necktie."

Rand glanced down. Then he burst into a roar of obscene blasphemy.

"Seven dollars and fifty cents I paid for that tie, not three weeks ago,"
he concluded. "Does your grandmother make patchwork quilts? If she does,
she can have it."

"My God!" Varcek stared at Rand unbelievingly. "Why, he hit you! You're
wounded!"

"Only in the necktie," Rand reassured him. "I have a hole in my shirt,
too." He reached under the latter garment and rummaged, as though to
evict a small trespasser. When he brought out his hand, he was holding a
battered .25-caliber bullet. He held it out to show to Varcek and Ritter.

"Sure," Ritter grinned at Varcek. "Didn't you know? Superman."

"I'm wearing a bulletproof vest; Mick McKenna loaned it to me yesterday,"
Rand enlightened Varcek. "I never wore one of the damn things before, and
if I can help it, I'll never wear one again. I'm damn near stewed alive
in it."

"Think how hot you'd be, right now, if you hadn't been wearing it,"
Ritter reminded him.

"Then you knew, since yesterday, that he would do this?" Varcek asked.

"I knew one or the other of you would," Rand replied. "I had quite a few
reasons for thinking it might be Dunmore, and one good one for not
suspecting you."

"You mean my dislike for firearms?"

"That could have been feigned, or it could have been overcome," Rand
replied. "I mean your knowledge of biology and biochemistry. If you'd
killed Lane Fleming, there'd have been no clumsy business of fake
accidents; not as long as both of you ate at the same table. He'd
have just died, an unimpeachably natural death." He turned to Ritter.
"Dave, I'm going upstairs; I want to get out of this damned coat of mail
I'm wearing. While I'm doing it, I want you to call Carter Tipton, at the
Jarrett place, and Humphrey Goode, and Mick McKenna, in that order. Tell
Goode to get over here as fast as he can, and come up to my room; tell
him we have to consider ways and means of implementing my suggestion to
him."




CHAPTER 21


In the month which followed, events transpired through a thickening
miasma of rumors, official communiques, journalistic conjectures,
and outright fabrications, fitfully lit by the glare of newsmen's
photo-bulbs, bulking with strange shapes, and emitting stranger noises.
There were the portentous rumblings of prepared statements, and the
hollow thumps of denials. There were soft murmurs of, "Now, this is
strictly off the record ..." followed by sibilant whispers. The unseen
screws of political pressure creaked, and whitewash brushes slurped
suavely. And there was an insistent yammering of bewildered and
unanswered questions. Fred Dunmore really had killed Arnold Rivers,
hadn't he? Or had he? Arnold Rivers had been double-crossing
Dunmore ... or had Dunmore been double-crossing Rivers? Somebody
had stolen ten--or was it twenty-five--thousand dollars' worth
of old pistols? Or was it just twenty-five thousand dollars? Or
what, if anything, had been stolen? Was somebody being framed for
something ... or was somebody covering up for somebody ... or what?
And wasn't there something funny about the way Lane Fleming got killed,
last December?

The surviving members of the Fleming family issued a few noncommittal
statements through their attorney, Humphrey Goode, and then the Iron
Curtain slammed down. Mick McKenna gave an outraged squawk or so, then
subsided. There was a series of pronunciamentos from the office of
District Attorney Charles P. Farnsworth, all full of high-order
abstractions and empty of meaning. The reporters, converging on the
Fleming house, found it occupied by the State Police, who kept them at
bay. Harry Bentz, of the New Belfast _Evening Mercury_, using a 30-power
spotting-'scope from the road, observed Dave Ritter, whom he recognized,
wearing a suit of butler's livery and standing in the doorway of the
garage, talking to Sergeant McKenna, Carter Tipton and Farnsworth; the
_Mercury_ exploited this scoop for all it was worth.

On the whole, the Rosemont Bayonet Murder was, from a journalistic
standpoint, an almost complete bust. There had been no arrest, no
hearing, no protracted trial, no sensational revelations. Only one
monolithic fact, officially attested and indisputable, loomed out of
the murk: "... and the said Frederick Parker Dunmore, deceased, did
receive the aforesaid gunshot-wounds, hereinbefore enumerated, at the
hands of the said Jefferson Davis Rand and at the hands of the said
David Abercrombie Ritter ..." and "... the said Jefferson Davis Rand
and the said David Abercrombie Ritter, being in mortal fear for their
several lives, did so act in defense of their several persons..." and,
finally, "... the said Frederick Parker Dunmore did die."

The _Evening Mercury_, which sheet the said Jefferson Davis Rand had
once cost the loss of an expensive libel-suit and exposed in certain
journalistic malpractices verging upon blackmail, promptly burst into
print with an indignant editorial entitled _Trial by Pistol_. The
terms: "legalized slaughter," and "flagrant whitewash," were used, and
mention was made of "the well known preference of a certain notorious
private detective for the procedure of _habeas_ cadaver." The principal
result of this outcry was to persuade an important New Belfast
manufacturer, who had hitherto resisted Rand's sales pressure, to
contract with the Tri-State Agency for the protection of his payroll
deliveries.

Then, at the other end of the state, the professor of Moral Science at a
small theological seminary caught his wife in _flagrante delicto_ with
one of the fourth-year students and opened fire upon them, at a range of
ten feet, with a 12-gauge pump-gun. The Rosemont Bayonet Murder, already
pretty well withered on the vine, passed quietly into limbo.

       *       *       *       *       *

Summer, almost a month before its official opening, was already a _fait
accompli_. The trees were in full leaf and invaded by nesting birds, the
air was fragrant with flower scents, and the mercury column of the
thermometer was stretching itself up toward the ninety mark.

They were all outside, where the long shadow of the Fleming house
fell across the lawn and driveway, gathered about the five parked cars.
The new Fleming butler, a short and somewhat globular Negro with a
gingerbread-crust complexion and an air of affable dignity, was helping
Pierre Jarrett and Karen Lawrence put a couple of cartons and a tall
peach-basket into Pierre's Plymouth. Colin MacBride, a streamer of
pipe-smoke floating back over his shoulder, was peering into his
luggage-compartment to check the stowage of his own cargo, while his
twelve-year-old son, Malcolm, another black Highlander like his
father, was helping Philip Cabot carry a big laundry hamper full of
newspaper-wrapped pistols to his Cadillac. Pierre's mother, and the
stylish-stout Mrs. Trehearne, and Gladys Fleming, obviously detached from
the bustle of pre-departure preparations, were standing to one side,
talking. And Rand had finished helping Adam Trehearne pack the last
container of his share of the Fleming collection into his car.

"I see Colin's about ready to leave, and I'm in his way," Trehearne said.
He extended his hand to Rand. "No need hashing over how we all feel about
this. If it hadn't been for you, that offer of Kendall's would have had
us stopped as dead as Rivers's had. Five hundred dollars deader, in
fact."

Stephen Gresham, carrying a package-filled orange crate, joined him,
setting down his burden. His wife and daughter, with another crate
between them, halted beside him.

"Haven't you got your stuff packed yet, Jeff?" Gresham asked.

"Jeff's been helping everybody else," Irene Gresham burst out. "Come on,
everybody; let's go help Jeff pack! You're going to have dinner with us,
aren't you, Jeff?"

"Oh, sorry. I have some more details to clear up; I'm having dinner here,
with Mrs. Fleming," Rand regretted. "I'll pack my stuff later."

Mrs. Jarrett, Mrs. Trehearne, and Gladys came over; one by one the rest
of the group converged upon them. Then, when the good-by's had been said,
and the promises to meet again had been given, they parted. One by one
the cars moved slowly down the driveway to the road. Only Gladys and
Rand, standing at the foot of the front steps, and the gingerbread-brown
butler were left.

"My, my; that was some party!" the Negro chuckled, gathering up three
empty pasteboard cartons and telescoping them together. "Dinner'll be
ready in about half an hour, Mrs. Fleming. Shall I go mix the cocktails
now?"

"Yes; do that, Reuben. In the drawing-room." She watched the servant
carry the discarded containers around the house, then turned to Rand.
"You know, not the least of your capabilities is your knack of finding
servant-replacements on short notice," she told him.

"My general factotum, Buck Pendexter, is a prominent personage in New
Belfast colored lodge circles," Rand said. "When your cook and maid quit
on you, the day of the blow-up, all I had to do was phone him, and he did
the rest." He got out his cigarettes, offered them, and snapped his
lighter. "I notice you're having cocktails in the drawing-room now."

"Yes. I suppose, in time, I'll stop imagining I see Fred Dunmore's blood
on the library floor. I got used to what had happened in the gunroom last
December. Shall we go in?" she asked, taking Rand's arm.

The cocktails were waiting when they entered the drawing-room, off the
dining-room. The butler poured for them and put the glasses and the
shaker on a low table by a lounge.

"I'm afraid dinner's going to be a little later than I said, Mrs.
Fleming," he apologized. "Things were kind of stirred up, today, with all
those people here."

"That's all right; we can wait," she replied. "We won't need anything
more, Reuben."

Motioning Rand down on the lounge beside her, she handed him a glass and
lifted her own.

"Now," she began. "Just what sort of skulduggery has been going on? As of
Friday, the top offer for the collection was twenty-five thousand five
hundred, from some dealer up in Massachusetts. And then, on Saturday, you
came bounding in with Stephen Gresham's certified check for twenty-six
thousand. And I seem to recall that the late unlamented Rivers's offer of
twenty-five thousand straight had them stopped. Not that I'm inclined
to look askance at an extra five hundred--I can buy a new hat with my
share of that, even after taxes--but I would like to know what happened.
And I might add, that's only one of many things I'd like to know."

"The client is entitled to a full report," Rand said, tasting his
cocktail. It was a vodka Martini, and very good. "You know, none of that
crowd are millionaires. Adam Trehearne, who's the plutocrat of the bunch,
isn't so filthy rich he doesn't know what to do with all his money--what
the tax-collectors leave of it--and the rest of them have to figure
pretty closely. The most they could possibly scratch together was
twenty-two thousand. So I put four thousand into the pot, myself,
bringing the total to five hundred over the Kendall offer, and hastily
declared the collection sold. Of course, my getting into it meant that
much less for everybody else, but five-sixths of a collection is better
than no pistols at all. I imagine Colin MacBride is honing up his
_sgian-dhu_ for me because I got that big Whitneyville Walker Colt, but
what the hell; he got the cased pair of Paterson .34's, and the Texas .40
with the ramming-lever."

"Why, I think the division was fair enough," Gladys said. "They'd agreed
to take your valuation, hadn't they? And all that slide-rule and
comptometer business.... But Jeff--four thousand dollars?" she queried.
"You only got five from me, and you can't run a detective agency on old
pistols."

Rand grinned as he set down his empty glass. Gladys refilled it from the
shaker.

"My dear lady, that five thousand I unblushingly accepted from you was
only part of it," he confessed.

"There was also a fee of three thousand from Stephen Gresham, for pulling
the bloodhounds of the D.A.'s office off his back in the matter of Arnold
Rivers, and there was five thousand from Humphrey Goode, which I suppose
he'll get the Premix Company to repay him, for engineering the
suppression of a lot of facts he wanted suppressed. And, finally, my
connection with this business brought that merger to my attention, and I
picked up a hundred shares of Premix at 73-1/4, and now I have two
hundred shares of Mill-Pack, worth about twenty-nine thousand, which I
can report for my income tax as capital gains. I'd say I could afford to
treat myself to a few old pistols for my collection."

"Well!" She raised both eyebrows over that. "Don't anybody tell me crime
doesn't pay."

"Yes. In my ghoulish way, I generally manage to bear myself in mind, on
an operation like this. I make no secret of my affection for money." He
lifted his glass and sipped slowly. "Look here, Gladys; are you satisfied
with the way this was handled?"

She shrugged. "I should be. When I started out as Lane's blood-avenger,
I suppose I expected things to end somewhere out of sight, in a nice,
antiseptic death-chamber at the state penitentiary. You must admit that
that business in the library was really bringing it home. There's no
question that you got the man who killed Lane, and if you hadn't, I'd
never have been at peace with myself. And I suppose all that chicanery
afterward was necessary, too."

"It was, if you wanted that merger to go through, and unless you wanted
to see the bottom drop out of your Premix stock," Rand assured her. "If
the true facts of Mr. Fleming's death had gotten out, there'd have been
a simply hideous stink. The Mill-Pack people would have backed out of
that merger like a bear out of an active bee-tree.... You know what the
situation really was, don't you?"

She shook her head. "I know Mill-Pack wanted to get control of the Premix
Company, and Lane refused to go in with them. I don't fully understand
his reasons, though."

"They weren't important; they were mainly verbal, and unrelated to
actuality," Rand said. "The important thing is that he did refuse, and
Mill-Pack wanted that merger so badly that it could be tasted in every
ounce of food they sold. They got Stephen Gresham to negotiate it for
them, and he was just on the point of reporting it to be an impossibility
when Fred Dunmore came to him with a proposition. Dunmore said he thought
he could persuade or force Mr. Fleming to consent, and he wanted a
contract guaranteeing him a vice-presidency with Mill-Pack, at forty
thousand a year, if and when the merger was accomplished. The contract
was duly signed about the first of last November."

"Well, good Lord!" Gladys Fleming's eyes widened. "When did you hear
about that?"

"I got that out of Gresham, a couple of days after the blow-up, when it
was too late to be of any use to me," Rand said. "If I'd known it from
the beginning, it might have saved me some work. Not much, though.
Gresham was just as badly scared about the facts coming out as Goode was.
I can't prove collusion between him and Goode, but Gresham was helping
spread the suicide story, too."

"Nice friends Lane had! But didn't anybody think there was something odd
about that accident, immediately after that contract was signed?"

"Of course they did, but try and get them to admit it, even to
themselves. Nobody likes to think that the new vice president of the
company murdered his way into the position. So everybody assumed the
attitudes of the three Japanese monkeys, and made respectable noises
about what a great loss Mr. Fleming was to the business world, and how
lucky Dunmore was that he had that contract."

She looked at him inquiringly for a moment. "Jeff, I want you to tell me
exactly how everything happened," she said. "I think I have a right to
know."

"Yes, you have," he agreed. "I'll tell you the whole thing, what I
actually know, and what I was forced to guess at:

"When this merger idea first took shape, last summer, Dunmore saw how
unalterably opposed to it Mr. Fleming was, and he began wishing him out
of the way. Some time later, he decided to do something about it. I
suppose Anton Varcek gave him the idea, in the first place, with his
jabber about the danger of a firearms accident. Dunmore decided he'd fix
one up for Mr. Fleming. First of all, he'd need a firearm, collector's
type and in good working order. It couldn't be one of the guns in the
collection. He'd have to keep it loaded all the time, waiting for an
opportunity to use it; he couldn't take a weapon out of the collection,
because it would be missed, and he couldn't load one and hang it up
again, because that would be discovered. So he had to get one of his own,
and he got it from Arnold Rivers."

"You know that? I mean, that's not just a guess?"

"I know it. The gun he got from Rivers was a .36 Colt, 1860 Navy-model,
serial number 2444," Rand told her. "Rivers had that gun last summer. He
had it refinished by a gunsmith named Umholtz. After Umholtz refinished
it, the gun was in Rivers's shop until November of last year, when it was
sold by Rivers personally. And that was the revolver that was found in
Lane Fleming's hand, and the one I got from the coroner, with a letter
vouching for the fact that it had been so found."

He finished his cocktail. Gladys picked up the shaker mechanically and
refilled his glass.

"Now we have Dunmore with this .36 Colt, loaded with powder, caps and
bullets from the ammunition supply in the gunroom, waiting for a chance
to use it. And also, he has this Mill-Pack contract in his safe deposit
box at the bank. That takes care of the weapon and the motive; only the
opportunity is needed, and that came on the 22nd of December, when Mr.
Fleming brought home that Confederate Leech & Rigdon .36 he had just
bought. It was just a piece of luck that both revolvers were alike in
caliber and general type, but it wouldn't have made a lot of difference.
Nobody was paying much attention to details, and Dunmore was on the scene
to misdirect any attention anybody would pay to anything.

"Now, we come to the mechanics of the thing; the _modus operandi_, or,
as it is professionally known, the M.O. You remember what happened that
evening. Nelda had gone out. You and Geraldine were listening to the
radio in the parlor, over there. Varcek had gone up to his lab. Mr.
Fleming was alone in the gunroom, working on his new revolver. And Fred
Dunmore said he was going to take a bath. What he did, of course, was to
draw a tub full of water, undress, put on his bathrobe and slippers, hide
the .36 Colt under the bathrobe, and then go across the hall to the
gunroom, where he found Mr. Fleming sitting on that cobbler's bench,
putting the finishing touches on the Leech & Rigdon. So he fired at close
range, wiped the prints off the Colt with an oily rag, put it in Lane
Fleming's right hand, put the rag in his left, grabbed up the Leech &
Rigdon, and scuttled back to his bathroom, deadlatching and shutting the
gunroom door as he went out. This last, of course, was a delaying tactic,
to give him time to establish his bathtub alibi."

He lifted the cocktail glass to his lips. These vodka Martinis were
strong, and three of them before dinner was leaning way over backward
maintaining the tradition of the hard-drinking private eye, but Gladys
was working on her third, and no client was going to drink him under.

"So, in the privacy of his bathroom, he kicked out of his slippers, threw
off his robe, hid the Leech & Rigdon, probably in a space between the tub
and the wall that I found while we were searching the house, the night
before the shooting of Dunmore, and jumped into the tub, there to await
developments. As soon as he heard Varcek's uproar in the hall, he could
emerge, dripping bathwater and innocence, to find out what the fuss was
all about.... Do you know anything about something called General
Semantics?" he asked suddenly.

"Yes. Before I married Lane, I went around with a radio ad-writer," she
told him. "He was a nice boy, but he'd get drunker than a boiled owl
about once a month, and weep about his crimes against sanity and meaning.
He'd recite long excerpts from his professional creations, and show how
he had been deliberately objectifying words and identifying them with the
things for which they stood, and confusing orders of abstraction, and
juggling multiordinal meanings. He was going to lend me his Koran, a book
called _Science and Sanity_, and then he took a job with an ad agency in
Chicago, and I got married, and--"

Rand nodded. "Then you realize that the word is not the thing spoken of,
and that the inference is not the description, and that we cannot know
'all' about anything. Etcetera," he added hastily, like a Papist signing
himself with the Cross. "Well, some considerable disregard of these
principles seems to have existed in this case. Dunmore is seen in a
bathrobe, his feet bare and making wet tracks on the floor, his hair wet,
etcetera. Straightaway, one and all appear to have assumed that he was in
the tub, splashing soapsuds around, while Lane Fleming was being shot.
And Anton Varcek, who can be taken as an example of what S. I. Hayakawa
was talking about when he spoke of people behaving like scientists
inside but not outside their laboratories, saw Lane Fleming dead, with
an object labeled 'revolver' in his hand, and, because of his verbal
identifications and semantic reactions, immediately included the
inference of an accident in his description of what he had seen. That was
just an extra dividend of luck for Dunmore; it got the whole crowd of
you thinking in terms of accidental shooting.

"Well, from there out, everything would have been a wonderful success for
Dunmore, except for one thing. Arnold Rivers must have heard, somehow,
that Lane Fleming had been shot with a Confederate .36 that he'd bought
somewhere that day, and that the revolver was in the hands of this
coroner of yours. So Arnold, with his big chisel well ground, went to see
if he could manage to get it out of the coroner for a few dollars. And
when he saw it, lo! it was the .36 Colt that he'd sold to Dunmore about
a month before."

Gladys set down her glass. "So!" she said. "Things begin to explain
themselves!"

"You may say so, indeed," Rand told her. "And what do you suppose Rivers
did with this little item of information? Why, as nearly as I can
reconstruct it, he did a very foolish thing. He tried to blackmail a man
who had committed a murder. He told Fred Dunmore he'd keep his mouth shut
about the .36 Colt, if Dunmore would get him the Fleming collection. He
wanted that instead of cash, because he could get more out of it, in a
few years, than Dunmore could ever scrape, and in the meantime, the
prestige of handling that collection would go a long way toward repairing
his rather dilapidated reputation. Fred should have bumped him off, right
then; it would have been the cheapest and easiest way out, and he'd
probably be alive and uncaught today if he had. But he was willing to pay
ten thousand dollars to save himself the trouble, and that's what he told
you Rivers had offered for the collection. The ten thousand Dunmore told
you Rivers was willing to pay was really the ten thousand he was willing
to pay, himself, to keep Rivers quiet.

"Then I was introduced into the picture, and, as you know, one of my
first acts was to go to Rivers's shop and sneer scornfully at Rivers's
supposed offer of ten thousand. And, right away, Rivers upped it to
twenty-five thousand. You'll recall, no doubt, that Mr. Fleming had a
life-insurance policy, one of these partnership mutual policies, which
gave both Dunmore and Varcek exactly twenty-five thousand apiece. I
assume that Rivers had found out about that.

"I thought, at the time, that it was peculiar that Rivers would jump his
own offer up, without knowing what anybody else was offering for the
collection. I see, now, that it wasn't his own money he was being so
generous with. And there was another incident, while I was at Rivers's
shop, that piqued my curiosity. Rivers had in his shop a .36 Leech &
Rigdon revolver, and I had been informed that it was a revolver of that
type that Mr. Fleming had brought home the evening he was killed. I
thought at the time that it was curious that two Confederate arms of the
same type and make should show up this far north, but my main idea in
buying it was the possibility that I might use it, in some way as
circumstances would permit, to throw a scare into somebody. Rivers was
quite willing to let me have it until he found out that I would be
staying at this house, and then he tried to back out of the sale and
offered me seventy-five dollars' credit on anything else in the shop, if
I'd return it to him. Well, I'd known that Mr. Fleming had been about to
start suit against Rivers over a crooked deal Rivers had put over on him,
and I knew that if Mr. Fleming's death had been murder, there had been a
substitution of revolvers. So I showed the gun I'd bought from Rivers to
Philip Cabot, who had seen the revolver Mr. Fleming had bought, and he
recognized it. It hasn't been established just how Rivers got the Leech
& Rigdon, and never will be; the only people who knew were Rivers and
Dunmore, and both are in the proverbial class of non-talebearers. I
assume that Dunmore gave it to Rivers as a sort of down payment on
Rivers's silence, and to get rid of it.

"Well, you remember Dunmore's angry incredulity when I told him that
Rivers was offering twenty-five thousand instead of ten thousand. One
would have thought, on the face of it, that he would have been glad;
as Nelda's husband, he would share in the higher price being paid for the
collection. But when you realize that Rivers was buying the collection
out of Dunmore's pocket, his reaction becomes quite understandable. I
daresay I signed Arnold Rivers's death-warrant, right there."

"I'll bet your conscience bothers you about that," Gladys remarked.

"Oh, sure; it's been gnawing hell out of me, ever since," Rand told her
cheerfully. "But, right away, Dunmore decided to kill Rivers. He called
him on the phone as soon as he left the table--here I'm speaking by the
book; I walked in on him, in the gunroom, as he was completing the call,
though I didn't know it at the time--and arranged to see him that
evening. Probably to devise ways and means of dealing with the Jeff Rand
menace, for an ostensible reason.

"So that night, Dunmore killed Rivers, with a bayonet. And here we have
some more Aristotelian confusion of orders of abstraction. The bayonet
is defined, verbally, as a 'soldier's weapon,' so Farnsworth and Mick
McKenna and the rest of them bemused themselves with suspects like
Stephen Gresham and Pierre Jarrett, and ignored Dunmore, who'd never had
an hour's military training in his life. I'd like to check up on what
picture-shows Dunmore had been seeing in the week or so before the
killing. I'll bet anything he'd been to one of these South-Pacific
banzai-operas. And speaking of confusing orders of abstraction, Mick
McKenna and his merry men pulled a classic in that line. They saw
Dunmore's automobile, verbally defined as a 'gray Plymouth coupé' in
Rivers's drive at the estimated time of the murder. Pierre Jarrett has
a car of that sort, so they included the inferential idea of Pierre
Jarrett's ownership of the car so described.

"Well, that's about all there is to it. Of course, I showed Fred Dunmore
the Leech & Rigdon, and told him it was the gun I'd gotten from the
coroner. That was all he needed to tell him that I was onto the murder,
and probably onto him as the murderer. But he had evidently assumed that
already; that was after he'd assembled my .38 and that .25 automatic, and
was planning to double-kill me and Anton Varcek. At that, he'd have
probably killed me, if I hadn't been wearing that bulletproof vest of
McKenna's. I owe Mick for my life; I'll have to buy him a drink,
sometime, to square that."

"Well, how about Walters, and the pistols he stole?" Gladys asked.
"Didn't that have anything to do with it?"

"No. It was a result of Mr. Fleming's death, of course. I understand that
the situation here had deteriorated rather abruptly after Mr. Fleming's
death. Walters was about fed up on the way things were here, and he was
going to hand in his notice. Then he decided that he ought to have a
stake to tide him over till he could get another buttling job, so he
started higrading the collection."

Gladys nodded. "I suppose he decided, after Lane's death, that he didn't
owe anybody here anything. Too bad he didn't wait, though. The situation
has remedied itself, and that's something else I owe you."

"Yes? I noticed that there was nobody here but you," Rand mentioned.

"Oh, Anton's gone to New York. The Rockefeller Foundation is financing
the major part of his research work, and he's well enough off to finance
the rest himself. Geraldine went with him. Nelda is still recuperating
from the shock of her sudden bereavement at a high-priced sanatorium--I
understand there's a very good-looking young doctor there. And she's
been talking about going to New York herself, in order, as she puts it,
to lead her own life. I don't know whether she was afraid I'd be a
restraining influence, or a dangerous competitor, but she feels that her
own life could be best led away from here." She set down her glass and
leaned back comfortably. "Peace, it's wonderful!"

Reuben, the gingerbread butler, appeared in the dining-room doorway.
"Dinner's served now, Mrs. Fleming," he announced.

Rand rose, and Gladys took his arm; together, they went into the
dining-room.




CHAPTER I

THE MILLIONAIRE'S DAUGHTER


The rays of the September sun flooded the great halls of the old
chateau of the Dukes of Charmerace, lighting up with their mellow glow
the spoils of so many ages and many lands, jumbled together with the
execrable taste which so often afflicts those whose only standard of
value is money.  The golden light warmed the panelled walls and old
furniture to a dull lustre, and gave back to the fading gilt of the
First Empire chairs and couches something of its old brightness.  It
illumined the long line of pictures on the walls, pictures of dead and
gone Charmeraces, the stern or debonair faces of the men, soldiers,
statesmen, dandies, the gentle or imperious faces of beautiful women.
It flashed back from armour of brightly polished steel, and drew dull
gleams from armour of bronze.  The hues of rare porcelain, of the rich
inlays of Oriental or Renaissance cabinets, mingled with the hues of
the pictures, the tapestry, the Persian rugs about the polished floor
to fill the hall with a rich glow of colour.

But of all the beautiful and precious things which the sun-rays warmed
to a clearer beauty, the face of the girl who sat writing at a table in
front of the long windows, which opened on to the centuries-old turf of
the broad terrace, was the most beautiful and the most precious.

It was a delicate, almost frail, beauty. Her skin was clear with the
transparent lustre of old porcelain, and her pale cheeks were only
tinted with the pink of the faintest roses. Her straight nose was
delicately cut, her rounded chin admirably moulded. A lover of beauty
would have been at a loss whether more to admire her clear, germander
eyes, so melting and so adorable, or the sensitive mouth, with its
rather full lips, inviting all the kisses. But assuredly he would have
been grieved by the perpetual air of sadness which rested on the
beautiful face--the wistful melancholy of the Slav, deepened by
something of personal misfortune and suffering.

Her face was framed by a mass of soft fair hair, shot with strands of
gold where the sunlight fell on it; and little curls, rebellious to the
comb, strayed over her white forehead, tiny feathers of gold.

She was addressing envelopes, and a long list of names lay on her left
hand. When she had addressed an envelope, she slipped into it a
wedding-card. On each was printed:

    "M. Gournay-Martin has the honour to inform
     you of the marriage of his daughter
     Germaine to the Duke of Charmerace."

She wrote steadily on, adding envelope after envelope to the pile ready
for the post, which rose in front of her. But now and again, when the
flushed and laughing girls who were playing lawn-tennis on the terrace,
raised their voices higher than usual as they called the score, and
distracted her attention from her work, her gaze strayed through the
open window and lingered on them wistfully; and as her eyes came back
to her task she sighed with so faint a wistfulness that she hardly knew
she sighed. Then a voice from the terrace cried, "Sonia! Sonia!"

"Yes. Mlle. Germaine?" answered the writing girl.

"Tea! Order tea, will you?" cried the voice, a petulant voice, rather
harsh to the ear.

"Very well, Mlle. Germaine," said Sonia; and having finished addressing
the envelope under her pen, she laid it on the pile ready to be posted,
and, crossing the room to the old, wide fireplace, she rang the bell.

She stood by the fireplace a moment, restoring to its place a rose
which had fallen from a vase on the mantelpiece; and her attitude, as
with arms upraised she arranged the flowers, displayed the delightful
line of a slender figure. As she let fall her arms to her side, a
footman entered the room.

"Will you please bring the tea, Alfred," she said in a charming voice
of that pure, bell-like tone which has been Nature's most precious gift
to but a few of the greatest actresses.

"For how many, miss?" said Alfred.

"For four--unless your master has come back."

"Oh, no; he's not back yet, miss. He went in the car to Rennes to
lunch; and it's a good many miles away. He won't be back for another
hour."

"And the Duke--he's not back from his ride yet, is he?"

"Not yet, miss," said Alfred, turning to go.

"One moment," said Sonia. "Have all of you got your things packed for
the journey to Paris? You will have to start soon, you know. Are all
the maids ready?"

"Well, all the men are ready, I know, miss. But about the maids, miss,
I can't say. They've been bustling about all day; but it takes them
longer than it does us."

"Tell them to hurry up; and be as quick as you can with the tea,
please," said Sonia.

Alfred went out of the room; Sonia went back to the writing-table. She
did not take up her pen; she took up one of the wedding-cards; and her
lips moved slowly as she read it in a pondering depression.

The petulant, imperious voice broke in upon her musing.

"Whatever are you doing, Sonia? Aren't you getting on with those
letters?" it cried angrily; and Germaine Gournay-Martin came through
the long window into the hall.

The heiress to the Gournay-Martin millions carried her tennis racquet
in her hand; and her rosy cheeks were flushed redder than ever by the
game. She was a pretty girl in a striking, high-coloured, rather
obvious way--the very foil to Sonia's delicate beauty. Her lips were a
little too thin, her eyes too shallow; and together they gave her a
rather hard air, in strongest contrast to the gentle, sympathetic face
of Sonia.

The two friends with whom Germaine had been playing tennis followed her
into the hall: Jeanne Gautier, tall, sallow, dark, with a somewhat
malicious air; Marie Bullier, short, round, commonplace, and
sentimental.

They came to the table at which Sonia was at work; and pointing to the
pile of envelopes, Marie said, "Are these all wedding-cards?"

"Yes; and we've only got to the letter V," said Germaine, frowning at
Sonia.

"Princesse de Vernan--Duchesse de Vauvieuse--Marquess--Marchioness?
You've invited the whole Faubourg Saint-Germain," said Marie, shuffling
the pile of envelopes with an envious air.

"You'll know very few people at your wedding," said Jeanne, with a
spiteful little giggle.

"I beg your pardon, my dear," said Germaine boastfully. "Madame de
Relzieres, my fiance's cousin, gave an At Home the other day in my
honour. At it she introduced half Paris to me--the Paris I'm destined
to know, the Paris you'll see in my drawing-rooms."

"But we shall no longer be fit friends for you when you're the Duchess
of Charmerace," said Jeanne.

"Why?" said Germaine; and then she added quickly, "Above everything,
Sonia, don't forget Veauleglise, 33, University Street--33, University
Street."

"Veauleglise--33, University Street," said Sonia, taking a fresh
envelope, and beginning to address it.

"Wait--wait! don't close the envelope. I'm wondering whether
Veauleglise ought to have a cross, a double cross, or a triple cross,"
said Germaine, with an air of extreme importance.

"What's that?" cried Marie and Jeanne together.

"A single cross means an invitation to the church, a double cross an
invitation to the marriage and the wedding-breakfast, and the triple
cross means an invitation to the marriage, the breakfast, and the
signing of the marriage-contract. What do you think the Duchess of
Veauleglise ought to have?"

"Don't ask me. I haven't the honour of knowing that great lady," cried
Jeanne.

"Nor I," said Marie.

"Nor I," said Germaine. "But I have here the visiting-list of the late
Duchess of Charmerace, Jacques' mother. The two duchesses were on
excellent terms. Besides the Duchess of Veauleglise is rather worn-out,
but greatly admired for her piety. She goes to early service three
times a week."

"Then put three crosses," said Jeanne.

"I shouldn't," said Marie quickly. "In your place, my dear, I shouldn't
risk a slip. I should ask my fiance's advice. He knows this world."

"Oh, goodness--my fiance! He doesn't care a rap about this kind of
thing. He has changed so in the last seven years. Seven years ago he
took nothing seriously. Why, he set off on an expedition to the South
Pole--just to show off. Oh, in those days he was truly a duke."

"And to-day?" said Jeanne.

"Oh, to-day he's a regular slow-coach. Society gets on his nerves. He's
as sober as a judge," said Germaine.

"He's as gay as a lark," said Sonia, in sudden protest.

Germaine pouted at her, and said: "Oh, he's gay enough when he's making
fun of people. But apart from that he's as sober as a judge."

"Your father must be delighted with the change," said Jeanne.

"Naturally he's delighted. Why, he's lunching at Rennes to-day with the
Minister, with the sole object of getting Jacques decorated."

"Well; the Legion of Honour is a fine thing to have," said Marie.

"My dear! The Legion of Honour is all very well for middle-class
people, but it's quite out of place for a duke!" cried Germaine.

Alfred came in, bearing the tea-tray, and set it on a little table near
that at which Sonia was sitting.

Germaine, who was feeling too important to sit still, was walking up
and down the room. Suddenly she stopped short, and pointing to a silver
statuette which stood on the piano, she said, "What's this? Why is this
statuette here?"

"Why, when we came in, it was on the cabinet, in its usual place," said
Sonia in some astonishment.

"Did you come into the hall while we were out in the garden, Alfred?"
said Germaine to the footman.

"No, miss," said Alfred.

"But some one must have come into it," Germaine persisted.

"I've not heard any one. I was in my pantry," said Alfred.

"It's very odd," said Germaine.

"It is odd," said Sonia. "Statuettes don't move about of themselves."

All of them stared at the statuette as if they expected it to move
again forthwith, under their very eyes. Then Alfred put it back in its
usual place on one of the cabinets, and went out of the room.

Sonia poured out the tea; and over it they babbled about the coming
marriage, the frocks they would wear at it, and the presents Germaine
had already received. That reminded her to ask Sonia if any one had yet
telephoned from her father's house in Paris; and Sonia said that no one
had.

"That's very annoying," said Germaine. "It shows that nobody has sent
me a present to-day."

Pouting, she shrugged her shoulders with an air of a spoiled child,
which sat but poorly on a well-developed young woman of twenty-three.

"It's Sunday. The shops don't deliver things on Sunday," said Sonia
gently.

But Germaine still pouted like a spoiled child.

"Isn't your beautiful Duke coming to have tea with us?" said Jeanne a
little anxiously.

"Oh, yes; I'm expecting him at half-past four. He had to go for a ride
with the two Du Buits. They're coming to tea here, too," said Germaine.

"Gone for a ride with the two Du Buits? But when?" cried Marie quickly.

"This afternoon."

"He can't be," said Marie. "My brother went to the Du Buits' house
after lunch, to see Andre and Georges. They went for a drive this
morning, and won't be back till late to-night."

"Well, but--but why did the Duke tell me so?" said Germaine, knitting
her brow with a puzzled air.

"If I were you, I should inquire into this thoroughly. Dukes--well, we
know what dukes are--it will be just as well to keep an eye on him,"
said Jeanne maliciously.

Germaine flushed quickly; and her eyes flashed. "Thank you. I have
every confidence in Jacques. I am absolutely sure of him," she said
angrily.

"Oh, well--if you're sure, it's all right," said Jeanne.

The ringing of the telephone-bell made a fortunate diversion.

Germaine rushed to it, clapped the receiver to her ear, and cried:
"Hello, is that you, Pierre? ... Oh, it's Victoire, is it? ... Ah, some
presents have come, have they? ... Well, well, what are they? ... What!
a paper-knife--another paper-knife! ... Another Louis XVI.
inkstand--oh, bother! ... Who are they from? ... Oh, from the Countess
Rudolph and the Baron de Valery." Her voice rose high, thrilling with
pride.

Then she turned her face to her friends, with the receiver still at her
ear, and cried: "Oh, girls, a pearl necklace too! A large one! The
pearls are big ones!"

"How jolly!" said Marie.

"Who sent it?" said Germaine, turning to the telephone again. "Oh, a
friend of papa's," she added in a tone of disappointment. "Never mind,
after all it's a pearl necklace. You'll be sure and lock the doors
carefully, Victoire, won't you? And lock up the necklace in the secret
cupboard.... Yes; thanks very much, Victoire. I shall see you
to-morrow."

She hung up the receiver, and came away from the telephone frowning.

"It's preposterous!" she said pettishly. "Papa's friends and relations
give me marvellous presents, and all the swells send me paper-knives.
It's all Jacques' fault. He's above all this kind of thing. The
Faubourg Saint-Germain hardly knows that we're engaged."

"He doesn't go about advertising it," said Jeanne, smiling.

"You're joking, but all the same what you say is true," said Germaine.
"That's exactly what his cousin Madame de Relzieres said to me the
other day at the At Home she gave in my honour--wasn't it, Sonia?" And
she walked to the window, and, turning her back on them, stared out of
it.

"She HAS got her mouth full of that At Home," said Jeanne to Marie in a
low voice.

There was an awkward silence. Marie broke it:

"Speaking of Madame de Relzieres, do you know that she is on pins and
needles with anxiety? Her son is fighting a duel to-day," she said.

"With whom?" said Sonia.

"No one knows. She got hold of a letter from the seconds," said Marie.

"My mind is quite at rest about Relzieres," said Germaine. "He's a
first-class swordsman. No one could beat him."

Sonia did not seem to share her freedom from anxiety. Her forehead was
puckered in little lines of perplexity, as if she were puzzling out
some problem; and there was a look of something very like fear in her
gentle eyes.

"Wasn't Relzieres a great friend of your fiance at one time?" said
Jeanne.

"A great friend? I should think he was," said Germaine. "Why, it was
through Relzieres that we got to know Jacques."

"Where was that?" said Marie.

"Here--in this very chateau," said Germaine.

"Actually in his own house?" said Marie, in some surprise.

"Yes; actually here. Isn't life funny?" said Germaine. "If, a few
months after his father's death, Jacques had not found himself hard-up,
and obliged to dispose of this chateau, to raise the money for his
expedition to the South Pole; and if papa and I had not wanted an
historic chateau; and lastly, if papa had not suffered from rheumatism,
I should not be calling myself in a month from now the Duchess of
Charmerace."

"Now what on earth has your father's rheumatism got to do with your
being Duchess of Charmerace?" cried Jeanne.

"Everything," said Germaine. "Papa was afraid that this chateau was
damp. To prove to papa that he had nothing to fear, Jacques, en grand
seigneur, offered him his hospitality, here, at Charmerace, for three
weeks."

"That was truly ducal," said Marie.

"But he is always like that," said Sonia.

"Oh, he's all right in that way, little as he cares about society,"
said Germaine. "Well, by a miracle my father got cured of his
rheumatism here. Jacques fell in love with me; papa made up his mind to
buy the chateau; and I demanded the hand of Jacques in marriage."

"You did? But you were only sixteen then," said Marie, with some
surprise.

"Yes; but even at sixteen a girl ought to know that a duke is a duke. I
did," said Germaine. "Then since Jacques was setting out for the South
Pole, and papa considered me much too young to get married, I promised
Jacques to wait for his return."

"Why, it was everything that's romantic!" cried Marie.

"Romantic? Oh, yes," said Germaine; and she pouted. "But between
ourselves, if I'd known that he was going to stay all that time at the
South Pole--"

"That's true," broke in Marie. "To go away for three years and stay
away seven--at the end of the world."

"All Germaine's beautiful youth," said Jeanne, with her malicious smile.

"Thanks!" said Germaine tartly.

"Well, you ARE twenty-three. It's the flower of one's age," said Jeanne.

"Not quite twenty-three," said Germaine hastily. "And look at the
wretched luck I've had. The Duke falls ill and is treated at
Montevideo. As soon as he recovers, since he's the most obstinate
person in the world, he resolves to go on with the expedition. He sets
out; and for an age, without a word of warning, there's no more news of
him--no news of any kind. For six months, you know, we believed him
dead."

"Dead? Oh, how unhappy you must have been!" said Sonia.

"Oh, don't speak of it! For six months I daren't put on a light frock,"
said Germaine, turning to her.

"A lot she must have cared for him," whispered Jeanne to Marie.

"Fortunately, one fine day, the letters began again. Three months ago a
telegram informed us that he was coming back; and at last the Duke
returned," said Germaine, with a theatrical air.

"The Duke returned," cried Jeanne, mimicking her.

"Never mind. Fancy waiting nearly seven years for one's fiance. That
was constancy," said Sonia.

"Oh, you're a sentimentalist, Mlle. Kritchnoff," said Jeanne, in a tone
of mockery. "It was the influence of the castle."

"What do you mean?" said Germaine.

"Oh, to own the castle of Charmerace and call oneself Mlle.
Gournay-Martin--it's not worth doing. One MUST become a duchess," said
Jeanne.

"Yes, yes; and for all this wonderful constancy, seven years of it,
Germaine was on the point of becoming engaged to another man," said
Marie, smiling.

"And he a mere baron," said Jeanne, laughing.

"What? Is that true?" said Sonia.

"Didn't you know, Mlle. Kritchnoff? She nearly became engaged to the
Duke's cousin, the Baron de Relzieres. It was not nearly so grand."

"Oh, it's all very well to laugh at me; but being the cousin and heir
of the Duke, Relzieres would have assumed the title, and I should have
been Duchess just the same," said Germaine triumphantly.

"Evidently that was all that mattered," said Jeanne. "Well, dear, I
must be off. We've promised to run in to see the Comtesse de Grosjean.
You know the Comtesse de Grosjean?"

She spoke with an air of careless pride, and rose to go.

"Only by name. Papa used to know her husband on the Stock Exchange when
he was still called simply M. Grosjean. For his part, papa preferred to
keep his name intact," said Germaine, with quiet pride.

"Intact? That's one way of looking at it. Well, then, I'll see you in
Paris. You still intend to start to-morrow?" said Jeanne.

"Yes; to-morrow morning," said Germaine.

Jeanne and Marie slipped on their dust-coats to the accompaniment of
chattering and kissing, and went out of the room.

As she closed the door on them, Germaine turned to Sonia, and said: "I
do hate those two girls! They're such horrible snobs."

"Oh, they're good-natured enough," said Sonia.

"Good-natured? Why, you idiot, they're just bursting with envy of
me--bursting!" said Germaine. "Well, they've every reason to be," she
added confidently, surveying herself in a Venetian mirror with a petted
child's self-content.




CHAPTER II

THE COMING OF THE CHAROLAIS


Sonia went back to her table, and once more began putting wedding-cards
in their envelopes and addressing them. Germaine moved restlessly about
the room, fidgeting with the bric-a-brac on the cabinets, shifting the
pieces about, interrupting Sonia to ask whether she preferred this
arrangement or that, throwing herself into a chair to read a magazine,
getting up in a couple of minutes to straighten a picture on the wall,
throwing out all the while idle questions not worth answering.
Ninety-nine human beings would have been irritated to exasperation by
her fidgeting; Sonia endured it with a perfect patience. Five times
Germaine asked her whether she should wear her heliotrope or her pink
gown at a forthcoming dinner at Madame de Relzieres'. Five times Sonia
said, without the slightest variation in her tone, "I think you look
better in the pink." And all the while the pile of addressed envelopes
rose steadily.

Presently the door opened, and Alfred stood on the threshold.

"Two gentlemen have called to see you, miss," he said.

"Ah, the two Du Buits," cried Germaine.

"They didn't give their names, miss."

"A gentleman in the prime of life and a younger one?" said Germaine.

"Yes, miss."

"I thought so. Show them in."

"Yes, miss. And have you any orders for me to give Victoire when we get
to Paris?" said Alfred.

"No. Are you starting soon?"

"Yes, miss. We're all going by the seven o'clock train. It's a long way
from here to Paris; we shall only reach it at nine in the morning. That
will give us just time to get the house ready for you by the time you
get there to-morrow evening," said Alfred.

"Is everything packed?"

"Yes, miss--everything. The cart has already taken the heavy luggage to
the station. All you'll have to do is to see after your bags."

"That's all right. Show M. du Buit and his brother in," said Germaine.

She moved to a chair near the window, and disposed herself in an
attitude of studied, and obviously studied, grace.

As she leant her head at a charming angle back against the tall back of
the chair, her eyes fell on the window, and they opened wide.

"Why, whatever's this?" she cried, pointing to it.

"Whatever's what?" said Sonia, without raising her eyes from the
envelope she was addressing.

"Why, the window. Look! one of the panes has been taken out. It looks
as if it had been cut."

"So it has--just at the level of the fastening," said Sonia. And the
two girls stared at the gap.

"Haven't you noticed it before?" said Germaine.

"No; the broken glass must have fallen outside," said Sonia.

The noise of the opening of the door drew their attention from the
window. Two figures were advancing towards them--a short, round, tubby
man of fifty-five, red-faced, bald, with bright grey eyes, which seemed
to be continually dancing away from meeting the eyes of any other human
being. Behind him came a slim young man, dark and grave. For all the
difference in their colouring, it was clear that they were father and
son: their eyes were set so close together. The son seemed to have
inherited, along with her black eyes, his mother's nose, thin and
aquiline; the nose of the father started thin from the brow, but ended
in a scarlet bulb eloquent of an exhaustive acquaintance with the
vintages of the world.

Germaine rose, looking at them with an air of some surprise and
uncertainty: these were not her friends, the Du Buits.

The elder man, advancing with a smiling bonhomie, bowed, and said in an
adenoid voice, ingratiating of tone: "I'm M. Charolais, young
ladies--M. Charolais--retired brewer--chevalier of the Legion of
Honour--landowner at Rennes. Let me introduce my son." The young man
bowed awkwardly. "We came from Rennes this morning, and we lunched at
Kerlor's farm."

"Shall I order tea for them?" whispered Sonia.

"Gracious, no!" said Germaine sharply under her breath; then, louder,
she said to M. Charolais, "And what is your object in calling?"

"We asked to see your father," said M. Charolais, smiling with broad
amiability, while his eyes danced across her face, avoiding any meeting
with hers. "The footman told us that M. Gournay-Martin was out, but
that his daughter was at home. And we were unable, quite unable, to
deny ourselves the pleasure of meeting you." With that he sat down; and
his son followed his example.

Sonia and Germaine, taken aback, looked at one another in some
perplexity.

"What a fine chateau, papa!" said the young man.

"Yes, my boy; it's a very fine chateau," said M. Charolais, looking
round the hall with appreciative but greedy eyes.

There was a pause.

"It's a very fine chateau, young ladies," said M. Charolais.

"Yes; but excuse me, what is it you have called about?" said Germaine.

M. Charolais crossed his legs, leant back in his chair, thrust his
thumbs into the arm-holes of his waistcoat, and said: "Well, we've come
about the advertisement we saw in the RENNES ADVERTISER, that M.
Gournay-Martin wanted to get rid of a motor-car; and my son is always
saying to me, 'I should like a motor-car which rushes the hills, papa.'
He means a sixty horse-power."

"We've got a sixty horse-power; but it's not for sale. My father is
even using it himself to-day," said Germaine.

"Perhaps it's the car we saw in the stable-yard," said M. Charolais.

"No; that's a thirty to forty horse-power. It belongs to me. But if
your son really loves rushing hills, as you say, we have a hundred
horse-power car which my father wants to get rid of. Wait; where's the
photograph of it, Sonia? It ought to be here somewhere."

The two girls rose, went to a table set against the wall beyond the
window, and began turning over the papers with which it was loaded in
the search for the photograph. They had barely turned their backs, when
the hand of young Charolais shot out as swiftly as the tongue of a
lizard catching a fly, closed round the silver statuette on the top of
the cabinet beside him, and flashed it into his jacket pocket.

Charolais was watching the two girls; one would have said that he had
eyes for nothing else, yet, without moving a muscle of his face, set in
its perpetual beaming smile, he hissed in an angry whisper, "Drop it,
you idiot! Put it back!"

The young man scowled askance at him.

"Curse you! Put it back!" hissed Charolais.

The young man's arm shot out with the same quickness, and the statuette
stood in its place.

There was just the faintest sigh of relief from Charolais, as Germaine
turned and came to him with the photograph in her hand. She gave it to
him.

"Ah, here we are," he said, putting on a pair of gold-rimmed pince-nez.
"A hundred horse-power car. Well, well, this is something to talk over.
What's the least you'll take for it?"

"_I_ have nothing to do with this kind of thing," cried Germaine. "You
must see my father. He will be back from Rennes soon. Then you can
settle the matter with him."

M. Charolais rose, and said: "Very good. We will go now, and come back
presently. I'm sorry to have intruded on you, young ladies--taking up
your time like this--"

"Not at all--not at all," murmured Germaine politely.

"Good-bye--good-bye," said M. Charolais; and he and his son went to the
door, and bowed themselves out.

"What creatures!" said Germaine, going to the window, as the door
closed behind the two visitors. "All the same, if they do buy the
hundred horse-power, papa will be awfully pleased. It is odd about that
pane. I wonder how it happened. It's odd too that Jacques hasn't come
back yet. He told me that he would be here between half-past four and
five."

"And the Du Buits have not come either," said Sonia. "But it's hardly
five yet."

"Yes; that's so. The Du Buits have not come either. What on earth are
you wasting your time for?" she added sharply, raising her voice. "Just
finish addressing those letters while you're waiting."

"They're nearly finished," said Sonia.

"Nearly isn't quite. Get on with them, can't you!" snapped Germaine.

Sonia went back to the writing-table; just the slightest deepening of
the faint pink roses in her cheeks marked her sense of Germaine's
rudeness. After three years as companion to Germaine Gournay-Martin,
she was well inured to millionaire manners; they had almost lost the
power to move her.

Germaine dropped into a chair for twenty seconds; then flung out of it.

"Ten minutes to five!" she cried. "Jacques is late. It's the first time
I've ever known him late."

She went to the window, and looked across the wide stretch of
meadow-land and woodland on which the chateau, set on the very crown of
the ridge, looked down. The road, running with the irritating
straightness of so many of the roads of France, was visible for a full
three miles. It was empty.

"Perhaps the Duke went to the Chateau de Relzieres to see his
cousin--though I fancy that at bottom the Duke does not care very much
for the Baron de Relzieres. They always look as though they detested
one another," said Sonia, without raising her eyes from the letter she
was addressing.

"You've noticed that, have you?" said Germaine. "Now, as far as Jacques
is concerned--he's--he's so indifferent. None the less, when we were at
the Relzieres on Thursday, I caught him quarrelling with Paul de
Relzieres."

"Quarrelling?" said Sonia sharply, with a sudden uneasiness in air and
eyes and voice.

"Yes; quarrelling. And they said good-bye to one another in the oddest
way."

"But surely they shook hands?" said Sonia.

"Not a bit of it. They bowed as if each of them had swallowed a poker."

"Why--then--then--" said Sonia, starting up with a frightened air; and
her voice stuck in her throat.

"Then what?" said Germaine, a little startled by her panic-stricken
face.

"The duel! Monsieur de Relzieres' duel!" cried Sonia.

"What? You don't think it was with Jacques?"

"I don't know--but this quarrel--the Duke's manner this morning--the Du
Buits' drive--" said Sonia.

"Of course--of course! It's quite possible--in fact it's certain!"
cried Germaine.

"It's horrible!" gasped Sonia. "Consider--just consider! Suppose
something happened to him. Suppose the Duke--"

"It's me the Duke's fighting about!" cried Germaine proudly, with a
little skipping jump of triumphant joy.

Sonia stared through her without seeing her. Her face was a dead
white--fear had chilled the lustre from her skin; her breath panted
through her parted lips; and her dilated eyes seemed to look on some
dreadful picture.

Germaine pirouetted about the hall at the very height of triumph. To
have a Duke fighting a duel about her was far beyond the wildest dreams
of snobbishness. She chuckled again and again, and once she clapped her
hands and laughed aloud.

"He's fighting a swordsman of the first class--an invincible
swordsman--you said so yourself," Sonia muttered in a tone of anguish.
"And there's nothing to be done--nothing."

She pressed her hands to her eyes as if to shut out a hideous vision.

Germaine did not hear her; she was staring at herself in a mirror, and
bridling to her own image.

Sonia tottered to the window and stared down at the road along which
must come the tidings of weal or irremediable woe. She kept passing her
hand over her eyes as if to clear their vision.

Suddenly she started, and bent forward, rigid, all her being
concentrated in the effort to see.

Then she cried: "Mademoiselle Germaine! Look! Look!"

"What is it?" said Germaine, coming to her side.

"A horseman! Look! There!" said Sonia, waving a hand towards the road.

"Yes; and isn't he galloping!" said Germaine.

"It's he! It's the Duke!" cried Sonia.

"Do you think so?" said Germaine doubtfully.

"I'm sure of it--sure!"

"Well, he gets here just in time for tea," said Germaine in a tone of
extreme satisfaction. "He knows that I hate to be kept waiting. He said
to me, 'I shall be back by five at the latest.' And here he is."

"It's impossible," said Sonia. "He has to go all the way round the
park. There's no direct road; the brook is between us."

"All the same, he's coming in a straight line," said Germaine.

It was true. The horseman had left the road and was galloping across
the meadows straight for the brook. In twenty seconds he reached its
treacherous bank, and as he set his horse at it, Sonia covered her eyes.

"He's over!" said Germaine. "My father gave three hundred guineas for
that horse."




CHAPTER III

LUPIN'S WAY


Sonia, in a sudden revulsion of feeling, in a reaction from her fears,
slipped back and sat down at the tea-table, panting quickly, struggling
to keep back the tears of relief. She did not see the Duke gallop up
the slope, dismount, and hand over his horse to the groom who came
running to him. There was still a mist in her eyes to blur his figure
as he came through the window.

"If it's for me, plenty of tea, very little cream, and three lumps of
sugar," he cried in a gay, ringing voice, and pulled out his watch.
"Five to the minute--that's all right." And he bent down, took
Germaine's hand, and kissed it with an air of gallant devotion.

If he had indeed just fought a duel, there were no signs of it in his
bearing. His air, his voice, were entirely careless. He was a man whose
whole thought at the moment was fixed on his tea and his punctuality.

He drew a chair near the tea-table for Germaine; sat down himself; and
Sonia handed him a cup of tea with so shaky a hand that the spoon
clinked in the saucer.

"You've been fighting a duel?" said Germaine.

"What! You've heard already?" said the Duke in some surprise.

"I've heard," said Germaine. "Why did you fight it?"

"You're not wounded, your Grace?" said Sonia anxiously.

"Not a scratch," said the Duke, smiling at her.

"Will you be so good as to get on with those wedding-cards, Sonia,"
said Germaine sharply; and Sonia went back to the writing-table.

Turning to the Duke, Germaine said, "Did you fight on my account?"

"Would you be pleased to know that I had fought on your account?" said
the Duke; and there was a faint mocking light in his eyes, far too
faint for the self-satisfied Germaine to perceive.

"Yes. But it isn't true. You've been fighting about some woman," said
Germaine petulantly.

"If I had been fighting about a woman, it could only be you," said the
Duke.

"Yes, that is so. Of course. It could hardly be about Sonia, or my
maid," said Germaine. "But what was the reason of the duel?"

"Oh, the reason of it was entirely childish," said the Duke. "I was in
a bad temper; and De Relzieres said something that annoyed me."

"Then it wasn't about me; and if it wasn't about me, it wasn't really
worth while fighting," said Germaine in a tone of acute disappointment.

The mocking light deepened a little in the Duke's eyes.

"Yes. But if I had been killed, everybody would have said, 'The Duke of
Charmerace has been killed in a duel about Mademoiselle
Gournay-Martin.' That would have sounded very fine indeed," said the
Duke; and a touch of mockery had crept into his voice.

"Now, don't begin trying to annoy me again," said Germaine pettishly.

"The last thing I should dream of, my dear girl," said the Duke,
smiling.

"And De Relzieres? Is he wounded?" said Germaine.

"Poor dear De Relzieres: he won't be out of bed for the next six
months," said the Duke; and he laughed lightly and gaily.

"Good gracious!" cried Germaine.

"It will do poor dear De Relzieres a world of good. He has a touch of
enteritis; and for enteritis there is nothing like rest," said the Duke.

Sonia was not getting on very quickly with the wedding-cards. Germaine
was sitting with her back to her; and over her shoulder Sonia could
watch the face of the Duke--an extraordinarily mobile face, changing
with every passing mood. Sometimes his eyes met hers; and hers fell
before them. But as soon as they turned away from her she was watching
him again, almost greedily, as if she could not see enough of his face
in which strength of will and purpose was mingled with a faint, ironic
scepticism, and tempered by a fine air of race.

He finished his tea; then he took a morocco case from his pocket, and
said to Germaine, "It must be quite three days since I gave you
anything."

He opened the case, disclosed a pearl pendant, and handed it to her.

"Oh, how nice!" she cried, taking it.

She took it from the case, saying that it was a beauty. She showed it
to Sonia; then she put it on and stood before a mirror admiring the
effect. To tell the truth, the effect was not entirely desirable. The
pearls did not improve the look of her rather coarse brown skin; and
her skin added nothing to the beauty of the pearls. Sonia saw this, and
so did the Duke. He looked at Sonia's white throat. She met his eyes
and blushed. She knew that the same thought was in both their minds;
the pearls would have looked infinitely better there.

Germaine finished admiring herself; she was incapable even of
suspecting that so expensive a pendant could not suit her perfectly.

The Duke said idly: "Goodness! Are all those invitations to the
wedding?"

"That's only down to the letter V," said Germaine proudly.

"And there are twenty-five letters in the alphabet! You must be
inviting the whole world. You'll have to have the Madeleine enlarged.
It won't hold them all. There isn't a church in Paris that will," said
the Duke.

"Won't it be a splendid marriage!" said Germaine. "There'll be
something like a crush. There are sure to be accidents."

"If I were you, I should have careful arrangements made," said the Duke.

"Oh, let people look after themselves. They'll remember it better if
they're crushed a little," said Germaine.

There was a flicker of contemptuous wonder in the Duke's eyes. But he
only shrugged his shoulders, and turning to Sonia, said, "Will you be
an angel and play me a little Grieg, Mademoiselle Kritchnoff? I heard
you playing yesterday. No one plays Grieg like you."

"Excuse me, Jacques, but Mademoiselle Kritchnoff has her work to do,"
said Germaine tartly.

"Five minutes' interval--just a morsel of Grieg, I beg," said the Duke,
with an irresistible smile.

"All right," said Germaine grudgingly. "But I've something important to
talk to you about."

"By Jove! So have I. I was forgetting. I've the last photograph I took
of you and Mademoiselle Sonia." Germaine frowned and shrugged her
shoulders. "With your light frocks in the open air, you look like two
big flowers," said the Duke.

"You call that important!" cried Germaine.

"It's very important--like all trifles," said the Duke, smiling. "Look!
isn't it nice?" And he took a photograph from his pocket, and held it
out to her.

"Nice? It's shocking! We're making the most appalling faces," said
Germaine, looking at the photograph in his hand.

"Well, perhaps you ARE making faces," said the Duke seriously,
considering the photograph with grave earnestness. "But they're not
appalling faces--not by any means. You shall be judge, Mademoiselle
Sonia. The faces--well, we won't talk about the faces--but the
outlines. Look at the movement of your scarf." And he handed the
photograph to Sonia.

"Jacques!" said Germaine impatiently.

"Oh, yes, you've something important to tell me. What is it?" said the
Duke, with an air of resignation; and he took the photograph from Sonia
and put it carefully back in his pocket.

"Victoire has telephoned from Paris to say that we've had a paper-knife
and a Louis Seize inkstand given us," said Germaine.

"Hurrah!" cried the Duke in a sudden shout that made them both jump.

"And a pearl necklace," said Germaine.

"Hurrah!" cried the Duke.

"You're perfectly childish," said Germaine pettishly. "I tell you we've
been given a paper-knife, and you shout 'hurrah!' I say we've been
given a pearl necklace, and you shout 'hurrah!' You can't have the
slightest sense of values."

"I beg your pardon. This pearl necklace is from one of your father's
friends, isn't it?" said the Duke.

"Yes; why?" said Germaine.

"But the inkstand and the paper-knife must be from the Faubourg
Saint-Germain, and well on the shabby side?" said the Duke.

"Yes; well?"

"Well then, my dear girl, what are you complaining about? They balance;
the equilibrium is restored. You can't have everything," said the Duke;
and he laughed mischievously.

Germaine flushed, and bit her lip; her eyes sparkled.

"You don't care a rap about me," she said stormily.

"But I find you adorable," said the Duke.

"You keep annoying me," said Germaine pettishly. "And you do it on
purpose. I think it's in very bad taste. I shall end by taking a
dislike to you--I know I shall."

"Wait till we're married for that, my dear girl," said the Duke; and he
laughed again, with a blithe, boyish cheerfulness, which deepened the
angry flush in Germaine's cheeks.

"Can't you be serious about anything?" she cried.

"I am the most serious man in Europe," said the Duke.

Germaine went to the window and stared out of it sulkily.

The Duke walked up and down the hall, looking at the pictures of some
of his ancestors--somewhat grotesque persons--with humorous
appreciation. Between addressing the envelopes Sonia kept glancing at
him. Once he caught her eye, and smiled at her. Germaine's back was
eloquent of her displeasure. The Duke stopped at a gap in the line of
pictures in which there hung a strip of old tapestry.

"I can never understand why you have left all these ancestors of mine
staring from the walls and have taken away the quite admirable and
interesting portrait of myself," he said carelessly.

Germaine turned sharply from the window; Sonia stopped in the middle of
addressing an envelope; and both the girls stared at him in
astonishment.

"There certainly was a portrait of me where that tapestry hangs. What
have you done with it?" said the Duke.

"You're making fun of us again," said Germaine.

"Surely your Grace knows what happened," said Sonia.

"We wrote all the details to you and sent you all the papers three
years ago. Didn't you get them?" said Germaine.

"Not a detail or a newspaper. Three years ago I was in the
neighbourhood of the South Pole, and lost at that," said the Duke.

"But it was most dramatic, my dear Jacques. All Paris was talking of
it," said Germaine. "Your portrait was stolen."

"Stolen? Who stole it?" said the Duke.

Germaine crossed the hall quickly to the gap in the line of pictures.

"I'll show you," she said.

She drew aside the piece of tapestry, and in the middle of the panel
over which the portrait of the Duke had hung he saw written in chalk
the words:

ARSENE LUPIN

"What do you think of that autograph?" said Germaine.

"'Arsene Lupin?'" said the Duke in a tone of some bewilderment.

"He left his signature. It seems that he always does so," said Sonia in
an explanatory tone.

"But who is he?" said the Duke.

"Arsene Lupin? Surely you know who Arsene Lupin is?" said Germaine
impatiently.

"I haven't the slightest notion," said the Duke.

"Oh, come! No one is as South-Pole as all that!" cried Germaine. "You
don't know who Lupin is? The most whimsical, the most audacious, and
the most genial thief in France. For the last ten years he has kept the
police at bay. He has baffled Ganimard, Holmlock Shears, the great
English detective, and even Guerchard, whom everybody says is the
greatest detective we've had in France since Vidocq. In fact, he's our
national robber. Do you mean to say you don't know him?"

"Not even enough to ask him to lunch at a restaurant," said the Duke
flippantly. "What's he like?"

"Like? Nobody has the slightest idea. He has a thousand disguises. He
has dined two evenings running at the English Embassy."

"But if nobody knows him, how did they learn that?" said the Duke, with
a puzzled air.

"Because the second evening, about ten o'clock, they noticed that one
of the guests had disappeared, and with him all the jewels of the
ambassadress."

"All of them?" said the Duke.

"Yes; and Lupin left his card behind him with these words scribbled on
it:"

"'This is not a robbery; it is a restitution. You took the Wallace
collection from us.'"

"But it was a hoax, wasn't it?" said the Duke.

"No, your Grace; and he has done better than that. You remember the
affair of the Daray Bank--the savings bank for poor people?" said
Sonia, her gentle face glowing with a sudden enthusiastic animation.

"Let's see," said the Duke. "Wasn't that the financier who doubled his
fortune at the expense of a heap of poor wretches and ruined two
thousand people?"

"Yes; that's the man," said Sonia. "And Lupin stripped Daray's house
and took from him everything he had in his strong-box. He didn't leave
him a sou of the money. And then, when he'd taken it from him, he
distributed it among all the poor wretches whom Daray had ruined."

"But this isn't a thief you're talking about--it's a philanthropist,"
said the Duke.

"A fine sort of philanthropist!" broke in Germaine in a peevish tone.
"There was a lot of philanthropy about his robbing papa, wasn't there?"

"Well," said the Duke, with an air of profound reflection, "if you come
to think of it, that robbery was not worthy of this national hero. My
portrait, if you except the charm and beauty of the face itself, is not
worth much."

"If you think he was satisfied with your portrait, you're very much
mistaken. All my father's collections were robbed," said Germaine.

"Your father's collections?" said the Duke. "But they're better guarded
than the Bank of France. Your father is as careful of them as the apple
of his eye."

"That's exactly it--he was too careful of them. That's why Lupin
succeeded."

"This is very interesting," said the Duke; and he sat down on a couch
before the gap in the pictures, to go into the matter more at his ease.
"I suppose he had accomplices in the house itself?"

"Yes, one accomplice," said Germaine.

"Who was that?" asked the Duke.

"Papa!" said Germaine.

"Oh, come! what on earth do you mean?" said the Duke. "You're getting
quite incomprehensible, my dear girl."

"Well, I'll make it clear to you. One morning papa received a
letter--but wait. Sonia, get me the Lupin papers out of the bureau."

Sonia rose from the writing-table, and went to a bureau, an admirable
example of the work of the great English maker, Chippendale. It stood
on the other side of the hall between an Oriental cabinet and a
sixteenth-century Italian cabinet--for all the world as if it were
standing in a crowded curiosity shop--with the natural effect that the
three pieces, by their mere incongruity, took something each from the
beauty of the other. Sonia raised the flap of the bureau, and taking
from one of the drawers a small portfolio, turned over the papers in it
and handed a letter to the Duke.

"This is the envelope," she said. "It's addressed to M. Gournay-Martin,
Collector, at the Chateau de Charmerace, Ile-et-Vilaine."

The Duke opened the envelope and took out a letter.

"It's an odd handwriting," he said.

"Read it--carefully," said Germaine.

It was an uncommon handwriting. The letters of it were small, but
perfectly formed. It looked the handwriting of a man who knew exactly
what he wanted to say, and liked to say it with extreme precision. The
letter ran:

    "DEAR SIR,"

    "Please forgive my writing to you without our having
     been introduced to one another; but I flatter myself
     that you know me, at any rate, by name."

    "There is in the drawing-room next your hall a
     Gainsborough of admirable quality which affords me
     infinite pleasure. Your Goyas in the same drawing-room
     are also to my liking, as well as your Van Dyck. In the
     further drawing-room I note the Renaissance cabinets--a
     marvellous pair--the Flemish tapestry, the Fragonard,
     the clock signed Boulle, and various other objects of
     less importance. But above all I have set my heart on
     that coronet which you bought at the sale of the
     Marquise de Ferronaye, and which was formerly worn by
     the unfortunate Princesse de Lamballe. I take the
     greatest interest in this coronet: in the first place,
     on account of the charming and tragic memories which it
     calls up in the mind of a poet passionately fond of
     history, and in the second place--though it is hardly
     worth while talking about that kind of thing--on
     account of its intrinsic value. I reckon indeed that
     the stones in your coronet are, at the very lowest,
     worth half a million francs."

    "I beg you, my dear sir, to have these different
     objects properly packed up, and to forward them,
     addressed to me, carriage paid, to the Batignolles
     Station. Failing this, I shall Proceed to remove them
     myself on the night of Thursday, August 7th."

    "Please pardon the slight trouble to which I am putting
     you, and believe me,"

    "Yours very sincerely,"

    "ARSENE LUPIN."

    "P.S.--It occurs to me that the pictures have not glass
     before them. It would be as well to repair this
     omission before forwarding them to me, and I am sure
     that you will take this extra trouble cheerfully. I am
     aware, of course, that some of the best judges declare
     that a picture loses some of its quality when seen
     through glass. But it preserves them, and we should
     always be ready and willing to sacrifice a portion of
     our own pleasure for the benefit of posterity. France
     demands it of us.--A. L."


The Duke laughed, and said, "Really, this is extraordinarily funny. It
must have made your father laugh."

"Laugh?" said Germaine. "You should have seen his face. He took it
seriously enough, I can tell you."

"Not to the point of forwarding the things to Batignolles, I hope,"
said the Duke.

"No, but to the point of being driven wild," said Germaine. "And since
the police had always been baffled by Lupin, he had the brilliant idea
of trying what soldiers could do. The Commandant at Rennes is a great
friend of papa's; and papa went to him, and told him about Lupin's
letter and what he feared. The colonel laughed at him; but he offered
him a corporal and six soldiers to guard his collection, on the night
of the seventh. It was arranged that they should come from Rennes by
the last train so that the burglars should have no warning of their
coming. Well, they came, seven picked men--men who had seen service in
Tonquin. We gave them supper; and then the corporal posted them in the
hall and the two drawing-rooms where the pictures and things were. At
eleven we all went to bed, after promising the corporal that, in the
event of any fight with the burglars, we would not stir from our rooms.
I can tell you I felt awfully nervous. I couldn't get to sleep for ages
and ages. Then, when I did, I did not wake till morning. The night had
passed absolutely quietly. Nothing out of the common had happened.
There had not been the slightest noise. I awoke Sonia and my father. We
dressed as quickly as we could, and rushed down to the drawing-room."

She paused dramatically.

"Well?" said the Duke.

"Well, it was done."

"What was done?" said the Duke.

"Everything," said Germaine. "Pictures had gone, tapestries had gone,
cabinets had gone, and the clock had gone."

"And the coronet too?" said the Duke.

"Oh, no. That was at the Bank of France. And it was doubtless to make
up for not getting it that Lupin stole your portrait. At any rate he
didn't say that he was going to steal it in his letter."

"But, come! this is incredible. Had he hypnotized the corporal and the
six soldiers? Or had he murdered them all?" said the Duke.

"Corporal? There wasn't any corporal, and there weren't any soldiers.
The corporal was Lupin, and the soldiers were part of his gang," said
Germaine.

"I don't understand," said the Duke. "The colonel promised your father
a corporal and six men. Didn't they come?"

"They came to the railway station all right," said Germaine. "But you
know the little inn half-way between the railway station and the
chateau? They stopped to drink there, and at eleven o'clock next
morning one of the villagers found all seven of them, along with the
footman who was guiding them to the chateau, sleeping like logs in the
little wood half a mile from the inn. Of course the innkeeper could not
explain when their wine was drugged. He could only tell us that a
motorist, who had stopped at the inn to get some supper, had called the
soldiers in and insisted on standing them drinks. They had seemed a
little fuddled before they left the inn, and the motorist had insisted
on driving them to the chateau in his car. When the drug took effect he
simply carried them out of it one by one, and laid them in the wood to
sleep it off."

"Lupin seems to have made a thorough job of it, anyhow," said the Duke.

"I should think so," said Germaine. "Guerchard was sent down from
Paris; but he could not find a single clue. It was not for want of
trying, for he hates Lupin. It's a regular fight between them, and so
far Lupin has scored every point."

"He must be as clever as they make 'em," said the Duke.

"He is," said Germaine. "And do you know, I shouldn't be at all
surprised if he's in the neighbourhood now."

"What on earth do you mean?" said the Duke.

"I'm not joking," said Germaine. "Odd things are happening. Some one
has been changing the place of things. That silver statuette now--it
was on the cabinet, and we found it moved to the piano. Yet nobody had
touched it. And look at this window. Some one has broken a pane in it
just at the height of the fastening."

"The deuce they have!" said the Duke.




CHAPTER IV

THE DUKE INTERVENES


The Duke rose, came to the window, and looked at the broken pane. He
stepped out on to the terrace and looked at the turf; then he came back
into the room.

"This looks serious," he said. "That pane has not been broken at all.
If it had been broken, the pieces of glass would be lying on the turf.
It has been cut out. We must warn your father to look to his treasures."

"I told you so," said Germaine. "I said that Arsene Lupin was in the
neighbourhood."

"Arsene Lupin is a very capable man," said the Duke, smiling. "But
there's no reason to suppose that he's the only burglar in France or
even in Ile-et-Vilaine."

"I'm sure that he's in the neighbourhood. I have a feeling that he is,"
said Germaine stubbornly.

The Duke shrugged his shoulders, and said a smile: "Far be it from me
to contradict you. A woman's intuition is always--well, it's always a
woman's intuition."

He came back into the hall, and as he did so the door opened and a
shock-headed man in the dress of a gamekeeper stood on the threshold.

"There are visitors to see you, Mademoiselle Germaine," he said, in a
very deep bass voice.

"What! Are you answering the door, Firmin?" said Germaine.

"Yes, Mademoiselle Germaine: there's only me to do it. All the servants
have started for the station, and my wife and I are going to see after
the family to-night and to-morrow morning. Shall I show these gentlemen
in?"

"Who are they?" said Germaine.

"Two gentlemen who say they have an appointment."

"What are their names?" said Germaine.

"They are two gentlemen. I don't know what their names are. I've no
memory for names."

"That's an advantage to any one who answers doors," said the Duke,
smiling at the stolid Firmin.

"Well, it can't be the two Charolais again. It's not time for them to
come back. I told them papa would not be back yet," said Germaine.

"No, it can't be them, Mademoiselle Germaine," said Firmin, with
decision.

"Very well; show them in," she said.

Firmin went out, leaving the door open behind him; and they heard his
hob-nailed boots clatter and squeak on the stone floor of the outer
hall.

"Charolais?" said the Duke idly. "I don't know the name. Who are they?"

"A little while ago Alfred announced two gentlemen. I thought they were
Georges and Andre du Buit, for they promised to come to tea. I told
Alfred to show them in, and to my surprise there appeared two horrible
provincials. I never--Oh!"

She stopped short, for there, coming through the door, were the two
Charolais, father and son.

M. Charolais pressed his motor-cap to his bosom, and bowed low. "Once
more I salute you, mademoiselle," he said.

His son bowed, and revealed behind him another young man.

"My second son. He has a chemist's shop," said M. Charolais, waving a
large red hand at the young man.

The young man, also blessed with the family eyes, set close together,
entered the hall and bowed to the two girls. The Duke raised his
eyebrows ever so slightly.

"I'm very sorry, gentlemen," said Germaine, "but my father has not yet
returned."

"Please don't apologize. There is not the slightest need," said M.
Charolais; and he and his two sons settled themselves down on three
chairs, with the air of people who had come to make a considerable stay.

For a moment, Germaine, taken aback by their coolness, was speechless;
then she said hastily: "Very likely he won't be back for another hour.
I shouldn't like you to waste your time."

"Oh, it doesn't matter," said M. Charolais, with an indulgent air; and
turning to the Duke, he added, "However, while we're waiting, if you're
a member of the family, sir, we might perhaps discuss the least you
will take for the motor-car."

"I'm sorry," said the Duke, "but I have nothing to do with it."

Before M. Charolais could reply the door opened, and Firmin's deep
voice said:

"Will you please come in here, sir?"

A third young man came into the hall.

"What, you here, Bernard?" said M. Charolais. "I told you to wait at
the park gates."

"I wanted to see the car too," said Bernard.

"My third son. He is destined for the Bar," said M. Charolais, with a
great air of paternal pride.

"But how many are there?" said Germaine faintly.

Before M. Charolais could answer, Firmin once more appeared on the
threshold.

"The master's just come back, miss," he said.

"Thank goodness for that!" said Germaine; and turning to M. Charolais,
she added, "If you will come with me, gentlemen, I will take you to my
father, and you can discuss the price of the car at once."

As she spoke she moved towards the door. M. Charolais and his sons rose
and made way for her. The father and the two eldest sons made haste to
follow her out of the room. But Bernard lingered behind, apparently to
admire the bric-a-brac on the cabinets. With infinite quickness he
grabbed two objects off the nearest, and followed his brothers. The
Duke sprang across the hall in three strides, caught him by the arm on
the very threshold, jerked him back into the hall, and shut the door.

"No you don't, my young friend," he said sharply.

"Don't what?" said Bernard, trying to shake off his grip.

"You've taken a cigarette-case," said the Duke.

"No, no, I haven't--nothing of the kind!" stammered Bernard.

The Duke grasped the young man's left wrist, plunged his hand into the
motor-cap which he was carrying, drew out of it a silver
cigarette-case, and held it before his eyes.

Bernard turned pale to the lips. His frightened eyes seemed about to
leap from their sockets.

"It--it--was a m-m-m-mistake," he stammered.

The Duke shifted his grip to his collar, and thrust his hand into the
breast-pocket of his coat. Bernard, helpless in his grip, and utterly
taken aback by his quickness, made no resistance.

The Duke drew out a morocco case, and said: "Is this a mistake too?"

"Heavens! The pendant!" cried Sonia, who was watching the scene with
parted lips and amazed eyes.

Bernard dropped on his knees and clasped his hands.

"Forgive me!" he cried, in a choking voice. "Forgive me! Don't tell any
one! For God's sake, don't tell any one!"

And the tears came streaming from his eyes.

"You young rogue!" said the Duke quietly.

"I'll never do it again--never! Oh, have pity on me! If my father knew!
Oh, let me off!" cried Bernard.

The Duke hesitated, and looked down on him, frowning and pulling at his
moustache. Then, more quickly than one would have expected from so
careless a trifler, his mind was made up.

"All right," he said slowly. "Just for this once ... be off with you."
And he jerked him to his feet and almost threw him into the outer hall.

"Thanks! ... oh, thanks!" said Bernard.

The Duke shut the door and looked at Sonia, breathing quickly.

"Well? Did you ever see anything like that? That young fellow will go a
long way. The cheek of the thing! Right under our very eyes! And this
pendant, too: it would have been a pity to lose it. Upon my word, I
ought to have handed him over to the police."

"No, no!" cried Sonia. "You did quite right to let him off--quite
right."

The Duke set the pendant on the ledge of the bureau, and came down the
hall to Sonia.

"What's the matter?" he said gently. "You're quite pale."

"It has upset me ... that unfortunate boy," said Sonia; and her eyes
were swimming with tears.

"Do you pity the young rogue?" said the Duke.

"Yes; it's dreadful. His eyes were so terrified, and so boyish. And, to
be caught like that ... stealing ... in the act. Oh, it's hateful!"

"Come, come, how sensitive you are!" said the Duke, in a soothing,
almost caressing tone. His eyes, resting on her charming, troubled
face, were glowing with a warm admiration.

"Yes; it's silly," said Sonia; "but you noticed his eyes--the hunted
look in them? You pitied him, didn't you? For you are kind at bottom."

"Why at bottom?" said the Duke.

"Oh, I said at bottom because you look sarcastic, and at first sight
you're so cold. But often that's only the mask of those who have
suffered the most.... They are the most indulgent," said Sonia slowly,
hesitating, picking her words.

"Yes, I suppose they are," said the Duke thoughtfully.

"It's because when one has suffered one understands.... Yes: one
understands," said Sonia.

There was a pause. The Duke's eyes still rested on her face. The
admiration in them was mingled with compassion.

"You're very unhappy here, aren't you?" he said gently.

"Me? Why?" said Sonia quickly.

"Your smile is so sad, and your eyes so timid," said the Duke slowly.
"You're just like a little child one longs to protect. Are you quite
alone in the world?"

His eyes and tones were full of pity; and a faint flush mantled Sonia's
cheeks.

"Yes, I'm alone," she said.

"But have you no relations--no friends?" said the Duke.

"No," said Sonia.

"I don't mean here in France, but in your own country.... Surely you
have some in Russia?"

"No, not a soul. You see, my father was a Revolutionist. He died in
Siberia when I was a baby. And my mother, she died too--in Paris. She
had fled from Russia. I was two years old when she died."

"It must be hard to be alone like that," said the Duke.

"No," said Sonia, with a faint smile, "I don't mind having no
relations. I grew used to that so young ... so very young. But what is
hard--but you'll laugh at me--"

"Heaven forbid!" said the Duke gravely.

"Well, what is hard is, never to get a letter ... an envelope that one
opens ... from some one who thinks about one--"

She paused, and then added gravely: "But I tell myself that it's
nonsense. I have a certain amount of philosophy."

She smiled at him--an adorable child's smile.

The Duke smiled too. "A certain amount of philosophy," he said softly.
"You look like a philosopher!"

As they stood looking at one another with serious eyes, almost with
eyes that probed one another's souls, the drawing-room door flung open,
and Germaine's harsh voice broke on their ears.

"You're getting quite impossible, Sonia!" she cried. "It's absolutely
useless telling you anything. I told you particularly to pack my
leather writing-case in my bag with your own hand. I happen to open a
drawer, and what do I see? My leather writing-case."

"I'm sorry," said Sonia. "I was going--"

"Oh, there's no need to bother about it. I'll see after it myself,"
said Germaine. "But upon my word, you might be one of our guests,
seeing how easily you take things. You're negligence personified."

"Come, Germaine ... a mere oversight," said the Duke, in a coaxing tone.

"Now, excuse me, Jacques; but you've got an unfortunate habit of
interfering in household matters. You did it only the other day. I can
no longer say a word to a servant--"

"Germaine!" said the Duke, in sharp protest.

Germaine turned from him to Sonia, and pointed to a packet of envelopes
and some letters, which Bernard Charolais had knocked off the table,
and said, "Pick up those envelopes and letters, and bring everything to
my room, and be quick about it!"

She flung out of the room, and slammed the door behind her.

Sonia seemed entirely unmoved by the outburst: no flush of
mortification stained her cheeks, her lips did not quiver. She stooped
to pick up the fallen papers.

"No, no; let me, I beg you," said the Duke, in a tone of distress. And
dropping on one knee, he began to gather together the fallen papers. He
set them on the table, and then he said: "You mustn't mind what
Germaine says. She's--she's--she's all right at heart. It's her manner.
She's always been happy, and had everything she wanted. She's been
spoiled, don't you know. Those kind of people never have any
consideration for any one else. You mustn't let her outburst hurt you."

"Oh, but I don't. I don't really," protested Sonia.

"I'm glad of that," said the Duke. "It isn't really worth noticing."

He drew the envelopes and unused cards into a packet, and handed them
to her.

"There!" he said, with a smile. "That won't be too heavy for you."

"Thank you," said Sonia, taking it from him.

"Shall I carry them for you?" said the Duke.

"No, thank you, your Grace," said Sonia.

With a quick, careless, almost irresponsible movement, he caught her
hand, bent down, and kissed it. A great wave of rosy colour flowed over
her face, flooding its whiteness to her hair and throat. She stood for
a moment turned to stone; she put her hand to her heart. Then on hasty,
faltering feet she went to the door, opened it, paused on the
threshold, turned and looked back at him, and vanished.




CHAPTER V

A LETTER FROM LUPIN


The Duke stood for a while staring thoughtfully at the door through
which Sonia had passed, a faint smile playing round his lips. He
crossed the hall to the Chippendale bureau, took a cigarette from a box
which stood on the ledge of it, beside the morocco case which held the
pendant, lighted it, and went slowly out on to the terrace. He crossed
it slowly, paused for a moment on the edge of it, and looked across the
stretch of country with musing eyes, which saw nothing of its beauty.
Then he turned to the right, went down a flight of steps to the lower
terrace, crossed the lawn, and took a narrow path which led into the
heart of a shrubbery of tall deodoras. In the middle of it he came to
one of those old stone benches, moss-covered and weather-stained, which
adorn the gardens of so many French chateaux. It faced a marble basin
from which rose the slender column of a pattering fountain. The figure
of a Cupid danced joyously on a tall pedestal to the right of the
basin. The Duke sat down on the bench, and was still, with that rare
stillness which only comes of nerves in perfect harmony, his brow
knitted in careful thought. Now and again the frown cleared from his
face, and his intent features relaxed into a faint smile, a smile of
pleasant memory. Once he rose, walked round the fountains frowning,
came back to the bench, and sat down again. The early September dusk
was upon him when at last he rose and with quick steps took his way
through the shrubbery, with the air of a man whose mind, for good or
ill, was at last made up.

When he came on to the upper terrace his eyes fell on a group which
stood at the further corner, near the entrance of the chateau, and he
sauntered slowly up to it.

In the middle of it stood M. Gournay-Martin, a big, round, flabby hulk
of a man. He was nearly as red in the face as M. Charolais; and he
looked a great deal redder owing to the extreme whiteness of the
whiskers which stuck out on either side of his vast expanse of cheek.
As he came up, it struck the Duke as rather odd that he should have the
Charolais eyes, set close together; any one who did not know that they
were strangers to one another might have thought it a family likeness.

The millionaire was waving his hands and roaring after the manner of a
man who has cultivated the art of brow-beating those with whom he does
business; and as the Duke neared the group, he caught the words:

"No; that's the lowest I'll take. Take it or leave it. You can say Yes,
or you can say Good-bye; and I don't care a hang which."

"It's very dear," said M. Charolais, in a mournful tone.

"Dear!" roared M. Gournay-Martin. "I should like to see any one else
sell a hundred horse-power car for eight hundred pounds. Why, my good
sir, you're having me!"

"No, no," protested M. Charolais feebly.

"I tell you you're having me," roared M. Gournay-Martin. "I'm letting
you have a magnificent car for which I paid thirteen hundred pounds for
eight hundred! It's scandalous the way you've beaten me down!"

"No, no," protested M. Charolais.

He seemed frightened out of his life by the vehemence of the big man.

"You wait till you've seen how it goes," said M. Gournay-Martin.

"Eight hundred is very dear," said M. Charolais.

"Come, come! You're too sharp, that's what you are. But don't say any
more till you've tried the car."

He turned to his chauffeur, who stood by watching the struggle with an
appreciative grin on his brown face, and said: "Now, Jean, take these
gentlemen to the garage, and run them down to the station. Show them
what the car can do. Do whatever they ask you--everything."

He winked at Jean, turned again to M. Charolais, and said: "You know,
M. Charolais, you're too good a man of business for me. You're hot
stuff, that's what you are--hot stuff. You go along and try the car.
Good-bye--good-bye."

The four Charolais murmured good-bye in deep depression, and went off
with Jean, wearing something of the air of whipped dogs. When they had
gone round the corner the millionaire turned to the Duke and said, with
a chuckle: "He'll buy the car all right--had him fine!"

"No business success of yours could surprise me," said the Duke
blandly, with a faint, ironical smile.

M. Gournay-Martin's little pig's eyes danced and sparkled; and the
smiles flowed over the distended skin of his face like little ripples
over a stagnant pool, reluctantly. It seemed to be too tightly
stretched for smiles.

"The car's four years old," he said joyfully. "He'll give me eight
hundred for it, and it's not worth a pipe of tobacco. And eight hundred
pounds is just the price of a little Watteau I've had my eye on for
some time--a first-class investment."

They strolled down the terrace, and through one of the windows into the
hall. Firmin had lighted the lamps, two of them. They made but a small
oasis of light in a desert of dim hall. The millionaire let himself
down very gingerly into an Empire chair, as if he feared, with
excellent reason, that it might collapse under his weight.

"Well, my dear Duke," he said, "you don't ask me the result of my
official lunch or what the minister said."

"Is there any news?" said the Duke carelessly.

"Yes. The decree will be signed to-morrow. You can consider yourself
decorated. I hope you feel a happy man," said the millionaire, rubbing
his fat hands together with prodigious satisfaction.

"Oh, charmed--charmed," said the Duke, with entire indifference.

"As for me, I'm delighted--delighted," said the millionaire. "I was
extremely keen on your being decorated. After that, and after a volume
or two of travels, and after you've published your grandfather's
letters with a good introduction, you can begin to think of the
Academy."

"The Academy!" said the Duke, startled from his usual coolness. "But
I've no title to become an Academician."

"How, no title?" said the millionaire solemnly; and his little eyes
opened wide. "You're a duke."

"There's no doubt about that," said the Duke, watching him with
admiring curiosity.

"I mean to marry my daughter to a worker--a worker, my dear Duke," said
the millionaire, slapping his big left hand with his bigger right.
"I've no prejudices--not I. I wish to have for son-in-law a duke who
wears the Order of the Legion of Honour, and belongs to the Academie
Francaise, because that is personal merit. I'm no snob."

A gentle, irrepressible laugh broke from the Duke.

"What are you laughing at?" said the millionaire, and a sudden lowering
gloom overspread his beaming face.

"Nothing--nothing," said the Duke quietly. "Only you're so full of
surprises."

"I've startled you, have I? I thought I should. It's true that I'm full
of surprises. It's my knowledge. I understand so much. I understand
business, and I love art, pictures, a good bargain, bric-a-brac, fine
tapestry. They're first-class investments. Yes, certainly I do love the
beautiful. And I don't want to boast, but I understand it. I have
taste, and I've something better than taste; I have a flair, the
dealer's flair."

"Yes, your collections, especially your collection in Paris, prove it,"
said the Duke, stifling a yawn.

"And yet you haven't seen the finest thing I have--the coronet of the
Princesse de Lamballe. It's worth half a million francs."

"So I've heard," said the Duke, a little wearily. "I don't wonder that
Arsene Lupin envied you it."

The Empire chair creaked as the millionaire jumped.

"Don't speak of the swine!" he roared. "Don't mention his name before
me."

"Germaine showed me his letter," said the Duke. "It is amusing."

"His letter! The blackguard! I just missed a fit of apoplexy from it,"
roared the millionaire. "I was in this very hall where we are now,
chatting quietly, when all at once in comes Firmin, and hands me a
letter."

He was interrupted by the opening of the door. Firmin came clumping
down the room, and said in his deep voice, "A letter for you, sir."

"Thank you," said the millionaire, taking the letter, and, as he fitted
his eye-glass into his eye, he went on, "Yes, Firmin brought me a
letter of which the handwriting,"--he raised the envelope he was
holding to his eyes, and bellowed, "Good heavens!"

"What's the matter?" said the Duke, jumping in his chair at the sudden,
startling burst of sound.

"The handwriting!--the handwriting!--it's THE SAME HANDWRITING!" gasped
the millionaire. And he let himself fall heavily backwards against the
back of his chair.

There was a crash. The Duke had a vision of huge arms and legs waving
in the air as the chair-back gave. There was another crash. The chair
collapsed. The huge bulk banged to the floor.

The laughter of the Duke rang out uncontrollably. He caught one of the
waving arms, and jerked the flabby giant to his feet with an ease which
seemed to show that his muscles were of steel.

"Come," he said, laughing still. "This is nonsense! What do you mean by
the same handwriting? It can't be."

"It is the same handwriting. Am I likely to make a mistake about it?"
spluttered the millionaire. And he tore open the envelope with an air
of frenzy.

He ran his eyes over it, and they grew larger and larger--they grew
almost of an average size.

"Listen," he said "listen:"

"DEAR SIR,"

"My collection of pictures, which I had the pleasure of starting three
years ago with some of your own, only contains, as far as Old Masters
go, one Velasquez, one Rembrandt, and three paltry Rubens. You have a
great many more. Since it is a shame such masterpieces should be in
your hands, I propose to appropriate them; and I shall set about a
respectful acquisition of them in your Paris house tomorrow morning."

"Yours very sincerely,"

"ARSENE LUPIN."

"He's humbugging," said the Duke.

"Wait! wait!" gasped the millionaire. "There's a postscript. Listen:"

"P.S.--You must understand that since you have been keeping the coronet
of the Princesse de Lamballe during these three years, I shall avail
myself of the same occasion to compel you to restore that piece of
jewellery to me.--A. L."

"The thief! The scoundrel! I'm choking!" gasped the millionaire,
clutching at his collar.

To judge from the blackness of his face, and the way he staggered and
dropped on to a couch, which was fortunately stronger than the chair,
he was speaking the truth.

"Firmin! Firmin!" shouted the Duke. "A glass of water! Quick! Your
master's ill."

He rushed to the side of the millionaire, who gasped: "Telephone!
Telephone to the Prefecture of Police! Be quick!"

The Duke loosened his collar with deft fingers; tore a Van Loo fan from
its case hanging on the wall, and fanned him furiously. Firmin came
clumping into the room with a glass of water in his hand.

The drawing-room door opened, and Germaine and Sonia, alarmed by the
Duke's shout, hurried in.

"Quick! Your smelling-salts!" said the Duke.

Sonia ran across the hall, opened one of the drawers in the Oriental
cabinet, and ran to the millionaire with a large bottle of
smelling-salts in her hand. The Duke took it from her, and applied it
to the millionaire's nose. The millionaire sneezed thrice with terrific
violence. The Duke snatched the glass from Firmin and dashed the water
into his host's purple face. The millionaire gasped and spluttered.

Germaine stood staring helplessly at her gasping sire.

"Whatever's the matter?" she said.

"It's this letter," said the Duke. "A letter from Lupin."

"I told you so--I said that Lupin was in the neighbourhood," cried
Germaine triumphantly.

"Firmin--where's Firmin?" said the millionaire, dragging himself
upright. He seemed to have recovered a great deal of his voice. "Oh,
there you are!"

He jumped up, caught the gamekeeper by the shoulder, and shook him
furiously.

"This letter. Where did it come from? Who brought it?" he roared.

"It was in the letter-box--the letter-box of the lodge at the bottom of
the park. My wife found it there," said Firmin, and he twisted out of
the millionaire's grasp.

"Just as it was three years ago," roared the millionaire, with an air
of desperation. "It's exactly the same coup. Oh, what a catastrophe!
What a catastrophe!"

He made as if to tear out his hair; then, remembering its scantiness,
refrained.

"Now, come, it's no use losing your head," said the Duke, with quiet
firmness. "If this letter isn't a hoax--"

"Hoax?" bellowed the millionaire. "Was it a hoax three years ago?"

"Very good," said the Duke. "But if this robbery with which you're
threatened is genuine, it's just childish."

"How?" said the millionaire.

"Look at the date of the letter--Sunday, September the third. This
letter was written to-day."

"Yes. Well, what of it?" said the millionaire.

"Look at the letter: 'I shall set about a respectful acquisition of
them in your Paris house to-morrow morning'--to-morrow morning."

"Yes, yes; 'to-morrow morning'--what of it?" said the millionaire.

"One of two things," said the Duke. "Either it's a hoax, and we needn't
bother about it; or the threat is genuine, and we have the time to stop
the robbery."

"Of course we have. Whatever was I thinking of?" said the millionaire.
And his anguish cleared from his face.

"For once in a way our dear Lupin's fondness for warning people will
have given him a painful jar," said the Duke.

"Come on! let me get at the telephone," cried the millionaire.

"But the telephone's no good," said Sonia quickly.

"No good! Why?" roared the millionaire, dashing heavily across the room
to it.

"Look at the time," said Sonia; "the telephone doesn't work as late as
this. It's Sunday."

The millionaire stopped dead.

"It's true. It's appalling," he groaned.

"But that doesn't matter. You can always telegraph," said Germaine.

"But you can't. It's impossible," said Sonia. "You can't get a message
through. It's Sunday; and the telegraph offices shut at twelve o'clock."

"Oh, what a Government!" groaned the millionaire. And he sank down
gently on a chair beside the telephone, and mopped the beads of anguish
from his brow. They looked at him, and they looked at one another,
cudgelling their brains for yet another way of communicating with the
Paris police.

"Hang it all!" said the Duke. "There must be some way out of the
difficulty."

"What way?" said the millionaire.

The Duke did not answer. He put his hands in his pockets and walked
impatiently up and down the hall. Germaine sat down on a chair. Sonia
put her hands on the back of a couch, and leaned forward, watching him.
Firmin stood by the door, whither he had retired to be out of the reach
of his excited master, with a look of perplexity on his stolid face.
They all watched the Duke with the air of people waiting for an oracle
to deliver its message. The millionaire kept mopping the beads of
anguish from his brow. The more he thought of his impending loss, the
more freely he perspired. Germaine's maid, Irma, came to the door
leading into the outer hall, which Firmin, according to his usual
custom, had left open, and peered in wonder at the silent group.

"I have it!" cried the Duke at last. "There is a way out."

"What is it?" said the millionaire, rising and coming to the middle of
the hall.

"What time is it?" said the Duke, pulling out his watch.

The millionaire pulled out his watch. Germaine pulled out hers. Firmin,
after a struggle, produced from some pocket difficult of access an
object not unlike a silver turnip. There was a brisk dispute between
Germaine and the millionaire about which of their watches was right.
Firmin, whose watch apparently did not agree with the watch of either
of them, made his deep voice heard above theirs. The Duke came to the
conclusion that it must be a few minutes past seven.

"It's seven or a few minutes past," he said sharply. "Well, I'm going
to take a car and hurry off to Paris. I ought to get there, bar
accidents, between two and three in the morning, just in time to inform
the police and catch the burglars in the very midst of their burglary.
I'll just get a few things together."

So saying, he rushed out of the hall.

"Excellent! excellent!" said the millionaire. "Your young man is a man
of resource, Germaine. It seems almost a pity that he's a duke. He'd do
wonders in the building trade. But I'm going to Paris too, and you're
coming with me. I couldn't wait idly here, to save my life. And I can't
leave you here, either. This scoundrel may be going to make a
simultaneous attempt on the chateau--not that there's much here that I
really value. There's that statuette that moved, and the pane cut out
of the window. I can't leave you two girls with burglars in the house.
After all, there's the sixty horse-power and the thirty horse-power
car--there'll be lots of room for all of us."

"Oh, but it's nonsense, papa; we shall get there before the servants,"
said Germaine pettishly. "Think of arriving at an empty house in the
dead of night."

"Nonsense!" said the millionaire. "Hurry off and get ready. Your bag
ought to be packed. Where are my keys? Sonia, where are my keys--the
keys of the Paris house?"

"They're in the bureau," said Sonia.

"Well, see that I don't go without them. Now hurry up. Firmin, go and
tell Jean that we shall want both cars. I will drive one, the Duke the
other. Jean must stay with you and help guard the chateau."

So saying he bustled out of the hall, driving the two girls before him.




CHAPTER VI

AGAIN THE CHAROLAIS


Hardly had the door closed behind the millionaire when the head of M.
Charolais appeared at one of the windows opening on to the terrace. He
looked round the empty hall, whistled softly, and stepped inside.
Inside of ten seconds his three sons came in through the windows, and
with them came Jean, the millionaire's chauffeur.

"Take the door into the outer hall, Jean," said M. Charolais, in a low
voice. "Bernard, take that door into the drawing-room. Pierre and
Louis, help me go through the drawers. The whole family is going to
Paris, and if we're not quick we shan't get the cars."

"That comes of this silly fondness for warning people of a coup,"
growled Jean, as he hurried to the door of the outer hall. "It would
have been so simple to rob the Paris house without sending that
infernal letter. It was sure to knock them all silly."

"What harm can the letter do, you fool?" said M. Charolais. "It's
Sunday. We want them knocked silly for to-morrow, to get hold of the
coronet. Oh, to get hold of that coronet! It must be in Paris. I've
been ransacking this chateau for hours."

Jean opened the door of the outer hall half an inch, and glued his eyes
to it. Bernard had done the same with the door opening into the
drawing-room. M. Charolais, Pierre, and Louis were opening drawers,
ransacking them, and shutting them with infinite quickness and
noiselessly.

"Bureau! Which is the bureau? The place is stuffed with bureaux!"
growled M. Charolais. "I must have those keys."

"That plain thing with the brass handles in the middle on the
left--that's a bureau," said Bernard softly.

"Why didn't you say so?" growled M. Charolais.

He dashed to it, and tried it. It was locked.

"Locked, of course! Just my luck! Come and get it open, Pierre. Be
smart!"

The son he had described as an engineer came quickly to the bureau,
fitting together as he came the two halves of a small jemmy. He fitted
it into the top of the flap. There was a crunch, and the old lock gave.
He opened the flap, and he and M. Charolais pulled open drawer after
drawer.

"Quick! Here's that fat old fool!" said Jean, in a hoarse, hissing
whisper.

He moved down the hall, blowing out one of the lamps as he passed it.
In the seventh drawer lay a bunch of keys. M. Charolais snatched it up,
glanced at it, took a bunch of keys from his own pocket, put it in the
drawer, closed it, closed the flap, and rushed to the window. Jean and
his sons were already out on the terrace.

M. Charolais was still a yard from the window when the door into the
outer hall opened and in came M. Gournay-Martin.

He caught a glimpse of a back vanishing through the window, and
bellowed: "Hi! A man! A burglar! Firmin! Firmin!"

He ran blundering down the hall, tangled his feet in the fragments of
the broken chair, and came sprawling a thundering cropper, which
knocked every breath of wind out of his capacious body. He lay flat on
his face for a couple of minutes, his broad back wriggling
convulsively--a pathetic sight!--in the painful effort to get his
breath back. Then he sat up, and with perfect frankness burst into
tears. He sobbed and blubbered, like a small child that has hurt
itself, for three or four minutes. Then, having recovered his
magnificent voice, he bellowed furiously: "Firmin! Firmin! Charmerace!
Charmerace!"

Then he rose painfully to his feet, and stood staring at the open
windows.

Presently he roared again: "Firmin! Firmin! Charmerace! Charmerace!"

He kept looking at the window with terrified eyes, as though he
expected somebody to step in and cut his throat from ear to ear.

"Firmin! Firmin! Charmerace! Charmerace!" he bellowed again.

The Duke came quietly into the hall, dressed in a heavy motor-coat, his
motor-cap on his head, and carrying a kit-bag in his hand.

"Did I hear you call?" he said.

"Call?" said the millionaire. "I shouted. The burglars are here
already. I've just seen one of them. He was bolting through the middle
window."

The Duke raised his eyebrows.

"Nerves," he said gently--"nerves."

"Nerves be hanged!" said the millionaire. "I tell you I saw him as
plainly as I see you."

"Well, you can't see me at all, seeing that you're lighting an acre and
a half of hall with a single lamp," said the Duke, still in a tone of
utter incredulity.

"It's that fool Firmin! He ought to have lighted six. Firmin! Firmin!"
bellowed the millionaire.

They listened for the sonorous clumping of the promoted gamekeeper's
boots, but they did not hear it. Evidently Firmin was still giving his
master's instructions about the cars to Jean.

"Well, we may as well shut the windows, anyhow," said the Duke,
proceeding to do so. "If you think Firmin would be any good, you might
post him in this hall with a gun to-night. There could be no harm in
putting a charge of small shot into the legs of these ruffians. He has
only to get one of them, and the others will go for their lives. Yet I
don't like leaving you and Germaine in this big house with only Firmin
to look after you."

"I shouldn't like it myself, and I'm not going to chance it," growled
the millionaire. "We're going to motor to Paris along with you, and
leave Jean to help Firmin fight these burglars. Firmin's all
right--he's an old soldier. He fought in '70. Not that I've much belief
in soldiers against this cursed Lupin, after the way he dealt with that
corporal and his men three years ago."

"I'm glad you're coming to Paris," said the Duke. "It'll be a weight
off my mind. I'd better drive the limousine, and you take the
landaulet."

"That won't do," said the millionaire. "Germaine won't go in the
limousine. You know she has taken a dislike to it."

"Nevertheless, I'd better bucket on to Paris, and let you follow slowly
with Germaine. The sooner I get to Paris the better for your
collection. I'll take Mademoiselle Kritchnoff with me, and, if you
like, Irma, though the lighter I travel the sooner I shall get there."

"No, I'll take Irma and Germaine," said the millionaire. "Germaine
would prefer to have Irma with her, in case you had an accident. She
wouldn't like to get to Paris and have to find a fresh maid."

The drawing-room door opened, and in came Germaine, followed by Sonia
and Irma. They wore motor-cloaks and hoods and veils. Sonia and Irma
were carrying hand-bags.

"I think it's extremely tiresome your dragging us off to Paris like
this in the middle of the night," said Germaine pettishly.

"Do you?" said the millionaire. "Well, then, you'll be interested to
hear that I've just seen a burglar here in this very room. I frightened
him, and he bolted through the window on to the terrace."

"He was greenish-pink, slightly tinged with yellow," said the Duke
softly.

"Greenish-pink? Oh, do stop your jesting, Jacques! Is this a time for
idiocy?" cried Germaine, in a tone of acute exasperation.

"It was the dim light which made your father see him in those colours.
In a bright light, I think he would have been an Alsatian blue," said
the Duke suavely.

"You'll have to break yourself of this silly habit of trifling, my dear
Duke, if ever you expect to be a member of the Academie Francaise,"
said the millionaire with some acrimony. "I tell you I did see a
burglar."

"Yes, yes. I admitted it frankly. It was his colour I was talking
about," said the Duke, with an ironical smile.

"Oh, stop your idiotic jokes! We're all sick to death of them!" said
Germaine, with something of the fine fury which so often distinguished
her father.

"There are times for all things," said the millionaire solemnly. "And I
must say that, with the fate of my collection and of the coronet
trembling in the balance, this does not seem to me a season for idle
jests."

"I stand reproved," said the Duke; and he smiled at Sonia.

"My keys, Sonia--the keys of the Paris house," said the millionaire.

Sonia took her own keys from her pocket and went to the bureau. She
slipped a key into the lock and tried to turn it. It would not turn;
and she bent down to look at it.

"Why--why, some one's been tampering with the lock! It's broken!" she
cried.

"I told you I'd seen a burglar!" cried the millionaire triumphantly.
"He was after the keys."

Sonia drew back the flap of the bureau and hastily pulled open the
drawer in which the keys had been.

"They're here!" she cried, taking them out of the drawer and holding
them up.

"Then I was just in time," said the millionaire. "I startled him in the
very act of stealing the keys."

"I withdraw! I withdraw!" said the Duke. "You did see a burglar,
evidently. But still I believe he was greenish-pink. They often are.
However, you'd better give me those keys, Mademoiselle Sonia, since I'm
to get to Paris first. I should look rather silly if, when I got there,
I had to break into the house to catch the burglars."

Sonia handed the keys to the Duke. He contrived to take her little
hand, keys and all, into his own, as he received them, and squeezed it.
The light was too dim for the others to see the flush which flamed in
her face. She went back and stood beside the bureau.

"Now, papa, are you going to motor to Paris in a thin coat and linen
waistcoat? If we're going, we'd better go. You always do keep us
waiting half an hour whenever we start to go anywhere," said Germaine
firmly.

The millionaire bustled out of the room. With a gesture of impatience
Germaine dropped into a chair. Irma stood waiting by the drawing-room
door. Sonia sat down by the bureau.

There came a sharp patter of rain against the windows.

"Rain! It only wanted that! It's going to be perfectly beastly!" cried
Germaine.

"Oh, well, you must make the best of it. At any rate you're well
wrapped up, and the night is warm enough, though it is raining," said
the Duke. "Still, I could have wished that Lupin confined his
operations to fine weather." He paused, and added cheerfully, "But,
after all, it will lay the dust."

They sat for three or four minutes in a dull silence, listening to the
pattering of the rain against the panes. The Duke took his
cigarette-case from his pocket and lighted a cigarette.

Suddenly he lost his bored air; his face lighted up; and he said
joyfully: "Of course, why didn't I think of it? Why should we start
from a pit of gloom like this? Let us have the proper illumination
which our enterprise deserves."

With that he set about lighting all the lamps in the hall. There were
lamps on stands, lamps on brackets, lamps on tables, and lamps which
hung from the roof--old-fashioned lamps with new reservoirs, new lamps
of what is called chaste design, brass lamps, silver lamps, and lamps
in porcelain. The Duke lighted them one after another, patiently,
missing none, with a cold perseverance. The operation was punctuated by
exclamations from Germaine. They were all to the effect that she could
not understand how he could be such a fool. The Duke paid no attention
whatever to her. His face illumined with boyish glee, he lighted lamp
after lamp.

Sonia watched him with a smiling admiration of the childlike enthusiasm
with which he performed the task. Even the stolid face of the ox-eyed
Irma relaxed into grins, which she smoothed quickly out with a
respectful hand.

The Duke had just lighted the twenty-second lamp when in bustled the
millionaire.

"What's this? What's this?" he cried, stopping short, blinking.

"Just some more of Jacques' foolery!" cried Germaine in tones of the
last exasperation.

"But, my dear Duke!--my dear Duke! The oil!--the oil!" cried the
millionaire, in a tone of bitter distress. "Do you think it's my object
in life to swell the Rockefeller millions? We never have more than six
lamps burning unless we are holding a reception."

"I think it looks so cheerful," said the Duke, looking round on his
handiwork with a beaming smile of satisfaction. "But where are the
cars? Jean seems a deuce of a time bringing them round. Does he expect
us to go to the garage through this rain? We'd better hurry him up.
Come on; you've got a good carrying voice."

He caught the millionaire by the arm, hurried him through the outer
hall, opened the big door of the chateau, and said: "Now shout!"

The millionaire looked at him, shrugged his shoulders, and said: "You
don't beat about the bush when you want anything."

"Why should I?" said the Duke simply. "Shout, my good chap--shout!"

The millionaire raised his voice in a terrific bellow of "Jean! Jean!
Firmin! Firmin!"

There was no answer.




CHAPTER VII

THE THEFT OF THE MOTOR-CARS


The night was very black; the rain pattered in their faces.

Again the millionaire bellowed: "Jean! Firmin! Firmin! Jean!"

No answer came out of the darkness, though his bellow echoed and
re-echoed among the out-buildings and stables away on the left.

He turned and looked at the Duke and said uneasily, "What on earth can
they be doing?"

"I can't conceive," said the Duke. "I suppose we must go and hunt them
out."

"What! in this darkness, with these burglars about?" said the
millionaire, starting back.

"If we don't, nobody else will," said the Duke. "And all the time that
rascal Lupin is stealing nearer and nearer your pictures. So buck up,
and come along!"

He seized the reluctant millionaire by the arm and drew him down the
steps. They took their way to the stables. A dim light shone from the
open door of the motor-house. The Duke went into it first, and stopped
short.

"Well, I'll be hanged!" he cried,

Instead of three cars the motor-house held but one--the hundred
horse-power Mercrac. It was a racing car, with only two seats. On them
sat two figures, Jean and Firmin.

"What are you sitting there for? You idle dogs!" bellowed the
millionaire.

Neither of the men answered, nor did they stir. The light from the lamp
gleamed on their fixed eyes, which stared at their infuriated master.

"What on earth is this?" said the Duke; and seizing the lamp which
stood beside the car, he raised it so that its light fell on the two
figures. Then it was clear what had happened: they were trussed like
two fowls, and gagged.

The Duke pulled a penknife from his pocket, opened the blade, stepped
into the car and set Firmin free. Firmin coughed and spat and swore.
The Duke cut the bonds of Jean.

"Well," said the Duke, in a tone of cutting irony, "what new game is
this? What have you been playing at?"

"It was those Charolais--those cursed Charolais!" growled Firmin.

"They came on us unawares from behind," said Jean.

"They tied us up, and gagged us--the swine!" said Firmin.

"And then--they went off in the two cars," said Jean.

"Went off in the two cars?" cried the millionaire, in blank
stupefaction.

The Duke burst into a shout of laughter.

"Well, your dear friend Lupin doesn't do things by halves," he cried.
"This is the funniest thing I ever heard of."

"Funny!" howled the millionaire. "Funny! Where does the fun come in?
What about my pictures and the coronet?"

The Duke laughed his laugh out; then changed on the instant to a man of
action.

"Well, this means a change in our plans," he said. "I must get to Paris
in this car here."

"It's such a rotten old thing," said the millionaire. "You'll never do
it."

"Never mind," said the Duke. "I've got to do it somehow. I daresay it's
better than you think. And after all, it's only a matter of two hundred
miles." He paused, and then said in an anxious tone: "All the same I
don't like leaving you and Germaine in the chateau. These rogues have
probably only taken the cars out of reach just to prevent your getting
to Paris. They'll leave them in some field and come back."

"You're not going to leave us behind. I wouldn't spend the night in the
chateau for a million francs. There's always the train," said the
millionaire.

"The train! Twelve hours in the train--with all those changes! You
don't mean that you will actually go to Paris by train?" said the Duke.

"I do," said the millionaire. "Come along--I must go and tell Germaine;
there's no time to waste," and he hurried off to the chateau.

"Get the lamps lighted, Jean, and make sure that the tank's full. As
for the engine, I must humour it and trust to luck. I'll get her to
Paris somehow," said the Duke.

He went back to the chateau, and Firmin followed him.

When the Duke came into the great hall he found Germaine and her father
indulging in recriminations. She was declaring that nothing would
induce her to make the journey by train; her father was declaring that
she should. He bore down her opposition by the mere force of his
magnificent voice.

When at last there came a silence, Sonia said quietly: "But is there a
train? I know there's a train at midnight; but is there one before?"

"A time-table--where's a time-table?" said the millionaire.

"Now, where did I see a time-table?" said the Duke. "Oh, I know;
there's one in the drawer of that Oriental cabinet." Crossing to the
cabinet, he opened the drawer, took out the time-table, and handed it
to M. Gournay-Martin.

The millionaire took it and turned over the leaves quickly, ran his eye
down a page, and said, "Yes, thank goodness, there is a train. There's
one at a quarter to nine."

"And what good is it to us? How are we to get to the station?" said
Germaine.

They looked at one another blankly. Firmin, who had followed the Duke
into the hall, came to the rescue.

"There's the luggage-cart," he said.

"The luggage-cart!" cried Germaine contemptuously.

"The very thing!" said the millionaire. "I'll drive it myself. Off you
go, Firmin; harness a horse to it."

Firmin went clumping out of the hall.

It was perhaps as well that he went, for the Duke asked what time it
was; and since the watches of Germaine and her father differed still,
there ensued an altercation in which, had Firmin been there, he would
doubtless have taken part.

The Duke cut it short by saying: "Well, I don't think I'll wait to see
you start for the station. It won't take you more than half an hour.
The cart is light. You needn't start yet. I'd better get off as soon as
the car is ready. It isn't as though I could trust it."

"One moment," said Germaine. "Is there a dining-car on the train? I'm
not going to be starved as well as have my night's rest cut to pieces."

"Of course there isn't a dining-car," snapped her father. "We must eat
something now, and take something with us."

"Sonia, Irma, quick! Be off to the larder and see what you can find.
Tell Mother Firmin to make an omelette. Be quick!"

Sonia went towards the door of the hall, followed by Irma.

"Good-night, and bon voyage, Mademoiselle Sonia," said the Duke.

"Good-night, and bon voyage, your Grace," said Sonia.

The Duke opened the door of the hall for her; and as she went out, she
said anxiously, in a low voice: "Oh, do--do be careful. I hate to think
of your hurrying to Paris on a night like this. Please be careful."

"I will be careful," said the Duke.

The honk of the motor-horn told him that Jean had brought the car to
the door of the chateau. He came down the room, kissed Germaine's
hands, shook hands with the millionaire, and bade them good-night. Then
he went out to the car. They heard it start; the rattle of it grew
fainter and fainter down the long avenue and died away.

M. Gournay-Martin arose, and began putting out lamps. As he did so, he
kept casting fearful glances at the window, as if he feared lest, now
that the Duke had gone, the burglars should dash in upon him.

There came a knock at the door, and Jean appeared on the threshold.

"His Grace told me that I was to come into the house, and help Firmin
look after it," he said.

The millionaire gave him instructions about the guarding of the house.
Firmin, since he was an old soldier, was to occupy the post of honour,
and guard the hall, armed with his gun. Jean was to guard the two
drawing-rooms, as being less likely points of attack. He also was to
have a gun; and the millionaire went with him to the gun-room and gave
him one and a dozen cartridges. When they came back to the hall, Sonia
called them into the dining-room; and there, to the accompaniment of an
unsubdued grumbling from Germaine at having to eat cold food at eight
at night, they made a hasty but excellent meal, since the chef had left
an elaborate cold supper ready to be served.

They had nearly finished it when Jean came in, his gun on his arm, to
say that Firmin had harnessed the horse to the luggage-cart, and it was
awaiting them at the door of the chateau.

"Send him in to me, and stand by the horse till we come out," said the
millionaire.

Firmin came clumping in.

The millionaire gazed at him solemnly, and said: "Firmin, I am relying
on you. I am leaving you in a position of honour and danger--a position
which an old soldier of France loves."

Firmin did his best to look like an old soldier of France. He pulled
himself up out of the slouch which long years of loafing through woods
with a gun on his arm had given him. He lacked also the old soldier of
France's fiery gaze. His eyes were lack-lustre.

"I look for anything, Firmin--burglary, violence, an armed assault,"
said the millionaire.

"Don't be afraid, sir. I saw the war of '70," said Firmin boldly,
rising to the occasion.

"Good!" said the millionaire. "I confide the chateau to you. I trust
you with my treasures."

He rose, and saying "Come along, we must be getting to the station," he
led the way to the door of the chateau.

The luggage-cart stood rather high, and they had to bring a chair out
of the hall to enable the girls to climb into it. Germaine did not
forget to give her real opinion of the advantages of a seat formed by a
plank resting on the sides of the cart. The millionaire climbed heavily
up in front, and took the reins.

"Never again will I trust only to motor-cars. The first thing I'll do
after I've made sure that my collections are safe will be to buy
carriages--something roomy," he said gloomily, as he realized the
discomfort of his seat.

He turned to Jean and Firmin, who stood on the steps of the chateau
watching the departure of their master, and said: "Sons of France, be
brave--be brave!"

The cart bumped off into the damp, dark night.

Jean and Firmin watched it disappear into the darkness. Then they came
into the chateau and shut the door.

Firmin looked at Jean, and said gloomily: "I don't like this. These
burglars stick at nothing. They'd as soon cut your throat as look at
you."

"It can't be helped," said Jean. "Besides, you've got the post of
honour. You guard the hall. I'm to look after the drawing-rooms.
They're not likely to break in through the drawing-rooms. And I shall
lock the door between them and the hall."

"No, no; you won't lock that door!" cried Firmin.

"But I certainly will," said Jean. "You'd better come and get a gun."

They went to the gun-room, Firmin still protesting against the locking
of the door between the drawing-rooms and the hall. He chose his gun;
and they went into the kitchen. Jean took two bottles of wine, a
rich-looking pie, a sweet, and carried them to the drawing-room. He
came back into the hall, gathered together an armful of papers and
magazines, and went back to the drawing-room. Firmin kept trotting
after him, like a little dog with a somewhat heavy footfall.

On the threshold of the drawing-room Jean paused and said: "The
important thing with burglars is to fire first, old cock. Good-night.
Pleasant dreams."

He shut the door and turned the key. Firmin stared at the decorated
panels blankly. The beauty of the scheme of decoration did not, at the
moment, move him to admiration.

He looked fearfully round the empty hall and at the windows, black
against the night. Under the patter of the rain he heard
footsteps--distinctly. He went hastily clumping down the hall, and
along the passage to the kitchen.

His wife was setting his supper on the table.

"My God!" he said. "I haven't been so frightened since '70." And he
mopped his glistening forehead with a dish-cloth. It was not a clean
dish-cloth; but he did not care.

"Frightened? What of?" said his wife.

"Burglars! Cut-throats!" said Firmin.

He told her of the fears of M. Gournay-Martin, and of his own
appointment to the honourable and dangerous post of guard of the
chateau.

"God save us!" said his wife. "You lock the door of that beastly hall,
and come into the kitchen. Burglars won't bother about the kitchen."

"But the master's treasures!" protested Firmin. "He confided them to
me. He said so distinctly."

"Let the master look after his treasures himself," said Madame Firmin,
with decision. "You've only one throat; and I'm not going to have it
cut. You sit down and eat your supper. Go and lock that door first,
though."

Firmin locked the door of the hall; then he locked the door of the
kitchen; then he sat down, and began to eat his supper. His appetite
was hearty, but none the less he derived little pleasure from the meal.
He kept stopping with the food poised on his fork, midway between the
plate and his mouth, for several seconds at a time, while he listened
with straining ears for the sound of burglars breaking in the windows
of the hall. He was much too far from those windows to hear anything
that happened to them, but that did not prevent him from straining his
ears. Madame Firmin ate her supper with an air of perfect ease. She
felt sure that burglars would not bother with the kitchen.

Firmin's anxiety made him terribly thirsty. Tumbler after tumbler of
wine flowed down the throat for which he feared. When he had finished
his supper he went on satisfying his thirst. Madame Firmin lighted his
pipe for him, and went and washed up the supper-dishes in the scullery.
Then she came back, and sat down on the other side of the hearth,
facing him. About the middle of his third bottle of wine, Firmin's
cold, relentless courage was suddenly restored to him. He began to talk
firmly about his duty to his master, his resolve to die, if need were,
in defence of his interests, of his utter contempt for
burglars--probably Parisians. But he did not go into the hall.
Doubtless the pleasant warmth of the kitchen fire held him in his chair.

He had described to his wife, with some ferocity, the cruel manner in
which he would annihilate the first three burglars who entered the
hall, and was proceeding to describe his method of dealing with the
fourth, when there came a loud knocking on the front door of the
chateau.

Stricken silent, turned to stone, Firmin sat with his mouth open, in
the midst of an unfinished word. Madame Firmin scuttled to the kitchen
door she had left unlocked on her return from the scullery, and locked
it. She turned, and they stared at one another.

The heavy knocker fell again and again and again. Between the knocking
there was a sound like the roaring of lions. Husband and wife stared at
one another with white faces. Firmin picked up his gun with trembling
hands, and the movement seemed to set his teeth chattering. They
chattered like castanets.

The knocking still went on, and so did the roaring.

It had gone on at least for five minutes, when a slow gleam of
comprehension lightened Madame Firmin's face.

"I believe it's the master's voice," she said.

"The master's voice!" said Firmin, in a hoarse, terrified whisper.

"Yes," said Madame Firmin. And she unlocked the thick door and opened
it a few inches.

The barrier removed, the well-known bellow of the millionaire came
distinctly to their ears. Firmin's courage rushed upon him in full
flood. He clumped across the room, brushed his wife aside, and trotted
to the door of the chateau. He unlocked it, drew the bolts, and threw
it open. On the steps stood the millionaire, Germaine, and Sonia. Irma
stood at the horse's head.

"What the devil have you been doing?" bellowed the millionaire. "What
do you keep me standing in the rain for? Why didn't you let me in?"

"B-b-b-burglars--I thought you were b-b-b-burglars," stammered Firmin.

"Burglars!" howled the millionaire. "Do I sound like a burglar?"

At the moment he did not; he sounded more like a bull of Bashan. He
bustled past Firmin to the door of the hall.

"Here! What's this locked for?" he bellowed.

"I--I--locked it in case burglars should get in while I was opening the
front door," stammered Firmin.

The millionaire turned the key, opened the door, and went into the
hall. Germaine followed him. She threw off her dripping coat, and said
with some heat: "I can't conceive why you didn't make sure that there
was a train at a quarter to nine. I will not go to Paris to-night.
Nothing shall induce me to take that midnight train!"

"Nonsense!" said the millionaire. "Nonsense--you'll have to go! Where's
that infernal time-table?" He rushed to the table on to which he had
thrown the time-table after looking up the train, snatched it up, and
looked at the cover. "Why, hang it!" he cried. "It's for June--June,
1903!"

"Oh!" cried Germaine, almost in a scream. "It's incredible! It's one of
Jacques' jokes!"




CHAPTER VIII

THE DUKE ARRIVES


The morning was gloomy, and the police-station with its bare,
white-washed walls--their white expanse was only broken by
notice-boards to which were pinned portraits of criminals with details
of their appearance, their crime, and the reward offered for their
apprehension--with its shabby furniture, and its dingy fireplace,
presented a dismal and sordid appearance entirely in keeping with the
September grey. The inspector sat at his desk, yawning after a night
which had passed without an arrest. He was waiting to be relieved. The
policeman at the door and the two policemen sitting on a bench by the
wall yawned in sympathy.

The silence of the street was broken by the rattle of an uncommonly
noisy motor-car. It stopped before the door of the police-station, and
the eyes of the inspector and his men turned, idly expectant, to the
door of the office.

It opened, and a young man in motor-coat and cap stood on the threshold.

He looked round the office with alert eyes, which took in everything,
and said, in a brisk, incisive voice: "I am the Duke of Charmerace. I
am here on behalf of M. Gournay-Martin. Last evening he received a
letter from Arsene Lupin saying he was going to break into his Paris
house this very morning."

At the name of Arsene Lupin the inspector sprang from his chair, the
policemen from their bench. On the instant they were wide awake,
attentive, full of zeal.

"The letter, your Grace!" said the inspector briskly.

The Duke pulled off his glove, drew the letter from the breast-pocket
of his under-coat, and handed it to the inspector.

The inspector glanced through it, and said. "Yes, I know the
handwriting well." Then he read it carefully, and added, "Yes, yes:
it's his usual letter."

"There's no time to be lost," said the Duke quickly. "I ought to have
been here hours ago--hours. I had a break-down. I'm afraid I'm too late
as it is."

"Come along, your Grace--come along, you," said the inspector briskly.

The four of them hurried out of the office and down the steps of the
police-station. In the roadway stood a long grey racing-car, caked with
muds--grey mud, brown mud, red mud--from end to end. It looked as if it
had brought samples of the soil of France from many districts.

"Come along; I'll take you in the car. Your men can trot along beside
us," said the Duke to the inspector.

He slipped into the car, the inspector jumped in and took the seat
beside him, and they started. They went slowly, to allow the two
policemen to keep up with them. Indeed, the car could not have made any
great pace, for the tyre of the off hind-wheel was punctured and
deflated.

In three minutes they came to the Gournay-Martin house, a wide-fronted
mass of undistinguished masonry, in an undistinguished row of exactly
the same pattern. There were no signs that any one was living in it.
Blinds were drawn, shutters were up over all the windows, upper and
lower. No smoke came from any of its chimneys, though indeed it was
full early for that.

Pulling a bunch of keys from his pocket, the Duke ran up the steps. The
inspector followed him. The Duke looked at the bunch, picked out the
latch-key, and fitted it into the lock. It did not open it. He drew it
out and tried another key and another. The door remained locked.

"Let me, your Grace," said the inspector. "I'm more used to it. I shall
be quicker."

The Duke handed the keys to him, and, one after another, the inspector
fitted them into the lock. It was useless. None of them opened the door.

"They've given me the wrong keys," said the Duke, with some vexation.
"Or no--stay--I see what's happened. The keys have been changed."

"Changed?" said the inspector. "When? Where?"

"Last night at Charmerace," said the Duke. "M. Gournay-Martin declared
that he saw a burglar slip out of one of the windows of the hall of the
chateau, and we found the lock of the bureau in which the keys were
kept broken."

The inspector seized the knocker, and hammered on the door.

"Try that door there," he cried to his men, pointing to a side-door on
the right, the tradesmen's entrance, giving access to the back of the
house. It was locked. There came no sound of movement in the house in
answer to the inspector's knocking.

"Where's the concierge?" he said.

The Duke shrugged his shoulders. "There's a housekeeper, too--a woman
named Victoire," he said. "Let's hope we don't find them with their
throats cut."

"That isn't Lupin's way," said the inspector. "They won't have come to
much harm."

"It's not very likely that they'll be in a position to open doors,"
said the Duke drily.

"Hadn't we better have it broken open and be done with it?"

The inspector hesitated.

"People don't like their doors broken open," he said. "And M.
Gournay-Martin--"

"Oh, I'll take the responsibility of that," said the Duke.

"Oh, if you say so, your Grace," said the inspector, with a brisk
relief. "Henri, go to Ragoneau, the locksmith in the Rue Theobald.
Bring him here as quickly as ever you can get him."

"Tell him it's a couple of louis if he's here inside of ten minutes,"
said the Duke.

The policeman hurried off. The inspector bent down and searched the
steps carefully. He searched the roadway. The Duke lighted a cigarette
and watched him. The house of the millionaire stood next but one to the
corner of a street which ran at right angles to the one in which it
stood, and the corner house was empty. The inspector searched the road,
then he went round the corner. The other policeman went along the road,
searching in the opposite direction. The Duke leant against the door
and smoked on patiently. He showed none of the weariness of a man who
has spent the night in a long and anxious drive in a rickety motor-car.
His eyes were bright and clear; he looked as fresh as if he had come
from his bed after a long night's rest. If he had not found the South
Pole, he had at any rate brought back fine powers of endurance from his
expedition in search of it.

The inspector came back, wearing a disappointed air.

"Have you found anything?" said the Duke.

"Nothing," said the inspector.

He came up the steps and hammered again on the door. No one answered
his knock. There was a clatter of footsteps, and Henri and the
locksmith, a burly, bearded man, his bag of tools slung over his
shoulder, came hurrying up. He was not long getting to work, but it was
not an easy job. The lock was strong. At the end of five minutes he
said that he might spend an hour struggling with the lock itself;
should he cut away a piece of the door round it?

"Cut away," said the Duke.

The locksmith changed his tools, and in less than three minutes he had
cut away a square piece from the door, a square in which the lock was
fixed, and taken it bodily away.

The door opened. The inspector drew his revolver, and entered the
house. The Duke followed him. The policemen drew their revolvers, and
followed the Duke. The big hall was but dimly lighted. One of the
policemen quickly threw back the shutters of the windows and let in the
light. The hall was empty, the furniture in perfect order; there were
no signs of burglary there.

"The concierge?" said the inspector, and his men hurried through the
little door on the right which opened into the concierge's rooms. In
half a minute one of them came out and said: "Gagged and bound, and his
wife too."

"But the rooms which were to be plundered are upstairs," said the
Duke--"the big drawing-rooms on the first floor. Come on; we may be
just in time. The scoundrels may not yet have got away."

He ran quickly up the stairs, followed by the inspector, and hurried
along the corridor to the door of the big drawing-room. He threw it
open, and stopped dead on the threshold. He had arrived too late.

The room was in disorder. Chairs were overturned, there were empty
spaces on the wall where the finest pictures of the millionaire had
been hung. The window facing the door was wide open. The shutters were
broken; one of them was hanging crookedly from only its bottom hinge.
The top of a ladder rose above the window-sill, and beside it,
astraddle the sill, was an Empire card-table, half inside the room,
half out. On the hearth-rug, before a large tapestry fire-screen, which
masked the wide fireplace, built in imitation of the big, wide
fireplaces of our ancestors, and rose to the level of the
chimney-piece--a magnificent chimney-piece in carved oak-were some
chairs tied together ready to be removed.

The Duke and the inspector ran to the window, and looked down into the
garden. It was empty. At the further end of it, on the other side of
its wall, rose the scaffolding of a house a-building. The burglars had
found every convenience to their hand--a strong ladder, an egress
through the door in the garden wall, and then through the gap formed by
the house in process of erection, which had rendered them independent
of the narrow passage between the walls of the gardens, which debouched
into a side-street on the right.

The Duke turned from the window, glanced at the wall opposite, then, as
if something had caught his eye, went quickly to it.

"Look here," he said, and he pointed to the middle of one of the empty
spaces in which a picture had hung.

There, written neatly in blue chalk, were the words:

ARSENE LUPIN

"This is a job for Guerchard," said the inspector. "But I had better
get an examining magistrate to take the matter in hand first." And he
ran to the telephone.

The Duke opened the folding doors which led into the second
drawing-room. The shutters of the windows were open, and it was plain
that Arsene Lupin had plundered it also of everything that had struck
his fancy. In the gaps between the pictures on the walls was again the
signature "Arsene Lupin."

The inspector was shouting impatiently into the telephone, bidding a
servant wake her master instantly. He did not leave the telephone till
he was sure that she had done so, that her master was actually awake,
and had been informed of the crime. The Duke sat down in an easy chair
and waited for him.

When he had finished telephoning, the inspector began to search the two
rooms for traces of the burglars. He found nothing, not even a
finger-mark.

When he had gone through the two rooms he said, "The next thing to do
is to find the house-keeper. She may be sleeping still--she may not
even have heard the noise of the burglars."

"I find all this extremely interesting," said the Duke; and he followed
the inspector out of the room.

The inspector called up the two policemen, who had been freeing the
concierge and going through the rooms on the ground-floor. They did not
then examine any more of the rooms on the first floor to discover if
they also had been plundered. They went straight up to the top of the
house, the servants' quarters.

The inspector called, "Victoire! Victoire!" two or three times; but
there was no answer.

They opened the door of room after room and looked in, the inspector
taking the rooms on the right, the policemen the rooms on the left.

"Here we are," said one of the policemen. "This room's been recently
occupied." They looked in, and saw that the bed was unmade. Plainly
Victoire had slept in it.

"Where can she be?" said the Duke.

"Be?" said the inspector. "I expect she's with the burglars--an
accomplice."

"I gather that M. Gournay-Martin had the greatest confidence in her,"
said the Duke.

"He'll have less now," said the inspector drily. "It's generally the
confidential ones who let their masters down."

The inspector and his men set about a thorough search of the house.
They found the other rooms undisturbed. In half an hour they had
established the fact that the burglars had confined their attention to
the two drawing-rooms. They found no traces of them; and they did not
find Victoire. The concierge could throw no light on her disappearance.
He and his wife had been taken by surprise in their sleep and in the
dark.

They had been gagged and bound, they declared, without so much as
having set eyes on their assailants. The Duke and the inspector came
back to the plundered drawing-room.

The inspector looked at his watch and went to the telephone.

"I must let the Prefecture know," he said.

"Be sure you ask them to send Guerchard," said the Duke.

"Guerchard?" said the inspector doubtfully.

"M. Formery, the examining magistrate, does not get on very well with
Guerchard."

"What sort of a man is M. Formery? Is he capable?" said the Duke.

"Oh, yes--yes. He's very capable," said the inspector quickly. "But he
doesn't have very good luck."

"M. Gournay-Martin particularly asked me to send for Guerchard if I
arrived too late, and found the burglary already committed," said the
Duke. "It seems that there is war to the knife between Guerchard and
this Arsene Lupin. In that case Guerchard will leave no stone unturned
to catch the rascal and recover the stolen treasures. M. Gournay-Martin
felt that Guerchard was the man for this piece of work very strongly
indeed."

"Very good, your Grace," said the inspector. And he rang up the
Prefecture of Police.

The Duke heard him report the crime and ask that Guerchard should be
sent. The official in charge at the moment seemed to make some demur.

The Duke sprang to his feet, and said in an anxious tone, "Perhaps I'd
better speak to him myself."

He took his place at the telephone and said, "I am the Duke of
Charmerace. M. Gournay-Martin begged me to secure the services of M.
Guerchard. He laid the greatest stress on my securing them, if on
reaching Paris I found that the crime had already been committed."

The official at the other end of the line hesitated. He did not refuse
on the instant as he had refused the inspector. It may be that he
reflected that M. Gournay-Martin was a millionaire and a man of
influence; that the Duke of Charmerace was a Duke; that he, at any
rate, had nothing whatever to gain by running counter to their wishes.
He said that Chief-Inspector Guerchard was not at the Prefecture, that
he was off duty; that he would send down two detectives, who were on
duty, at once, and summon Chief-Inspector Guerchard with all speed. The
Duke thanked him and rang off.

"That's all right," he said cheerfully, turning to the inspector. "What
time will M. Formery be here?"

"Well, I don't expect him for another hour," said the inspector. "He
won't come till he's had his breakfast. He always makes a good
breakfast before setting out to start an inquiry, lest he shouldn't
find time to make one after he's begun it."

"Breakfast--breakfast--that's a great idea," said the Duke. "Now you
come to remind me, I'm absolutely famished. I got some supper on my way
late last night; but I've had nothing since. I suppose nothing
interesting will happen till M. Formery comes; and I may as well get
some food. But I don't want to leave the house. I think I'll see what
the concierge can do for me."

So saying, he went downstairs and interviewed the concierge. The
concierge seemed to be still doubtful whether he was standing on his
head or his heels, but he undertook to supply the needs of the Duke.
The Duke gave him a louis, and he hurried off to get food from a
restaurant.

The Duke went upstairs to the bathroom and refreshed himself with a
cold bath. By the time he had bathed and dressed the concierge had a
meal ready for him in the dining-room. He ate it with the heartiest
appetite. Then he sent out for a barber and was shaved.

He then repaired to the pillaged drawing-room, disposed himself in the
most restful attitude on a sofa, and lighted an excellent cigar. In the
middle of it the inspector came to him. He was not wearing a very
cheerful air; and he told the Duke that he had found no clue to the
perpetrators of the crime, though M. Dieusy and M. Bonavent, the
detectives from the Prefecture of Police, had joined him in the search.

The Duke was condoling with him on this failure when they heard a
knocking at the front door, and then voices on the stairs.

"Ah! Here is M. Formery!" said the inspector cheerfully. "Now we can
get on."




CHAPTER IX

M. FORMERY OPENS THE INQUIRY


The examining magistrate came into the room. He was a plump and pink
little man, with very bright eyes. His bristly hair stood up straight
all over his head, giving it the appearance of a broad, dapple-grey
clothes-brush. He appeared to be of the opinion that Nature had given
the world the toothbrush as a model of what a moustache should be; and
his own was clipped to that pattern.

"The Duke of Charmerace, M. Formery," said the inspector.

The little man bowed and said, "Charmed, charmed to make your
acquaintance, your Grace--though the occasion--the occasion is somewhat
painful. The treasures of M. Gournay-Martin are known to all the world.
France will deplore his losses." He paused, and added hastily, "But we
shall recover them--we shall recover them."

The Duke rose, bowed, and protested his pleasure at making the
acquaintance of M. Formery.

"Is this the scene of the robbery, inspector?" said M. Formery; and he
rubbed his hands together with a very cheerful air.

"Yes, sir," said the inspector. "These two rooms seem to be the only
ones touched, though of course we can't tell till M. Gournay-Martin
arrives. Jewels may have been stolen from the bedrooms."

"I fear that M. Gournay-Martin won't be of much help for some days,"
said the Duke. "When I left him he was nearly distracted; and he won't
be any better after a night journey to Paris from Charmerace. But
probably these are the only two rooms touched, for in them M.
Gournay-Martin had gathered together the gems of his collection. Over
the doors hung some pieces of Flemish tapestry--marvels--the
composition admirable--the colouring delightful."

"It is easy to see that your Grace was very fond of them," said M.
Formery.

"I should think so," said the Duke. "I looked on them as already
belonging to me, for my father-in-law was going to give them to me as a
wedding present."

"A great loss--a great loss. But we will recover them, sooner or later,
you can rest assured of it. I hope you have touched nothing in this
room. If anything has been moved it may put me off the scent
altogether. Let me have the details, inspector."

The inspector reported the arrival of the Duke at the police-station
with Arsene Lupin's letter to M. Gournay-Martin; the discovery that the
keys had been changed and would not open the door of the house; the
opening of it by the locksmith; the discovery of the concierge and his
wife gagged and bound.

"Probably accomplices," said M. Formery.

"Does Lupin always work with accomplices?" said the Duke. "Pardon my
ignorance--but I've been out of France for so long--before he attained
to this height of notoriety."

"Lupin--why Lupin?" said M. Formery sharply.

"Why, there is the letter from Lupin which my future father-in-law
received last night; its arrival was followed by the theft of his two
swiftest motor-cars; and then, these signatures on the wall here," said
the Duke in some surprise at the question.

"Lupin! Lupin! Everybody has Lupin on the brain!" said M. Formery
impatiently. "I'm sick of hearing his name. This letter and these
signatures are just as likely to be forgeries as not."

"I wonder if Guerchard will take that view," said the Duke.

"Guerchard? Surely we're not going to be cluttered up with Guerchard.
He has Lupin on the brain worse than any one else."

"But M. Gournay-Martin particularly asked me to send for Guerchard if I
arrived too late to prevent the burglary. He would never forgive me if
I had neglected his request: so I telephoned for him--to the Prefecture
of Police," said the Duke.

"Oh, well, if you've already telephoned for him. But it was
unnecessary--absolutely unnecessary," said M. Formery sharply.

"I didn't know," said the Duke politely.

"Oh, there was no harm in it--it doesn't matter," said M. Formery in a
discontented tone with a discontented air.

He walked slowly round the room, paused by the windows, looked at the
ladder, and scanned the garden:

"Arsene Lupin," he said scornfully. "Arsene Lupin doesn't leave traces
all over the place. There's nothing but traces. Are we going to have
that silly Lupin joke all over again?"

"I think, sir, that this time joke is the word, for this is a burglary
pure and simple," said the inspector.

"Yes, it's plain as daylight," said M. Formery "The burglars came in by
this window, and they went out by it."

He crossed the room to a tall safe which stood before the unused door.
The safe was covered with velvet, and velvet curtains hung before its
door. He drew the curtains, and tried the handle of the door of the
safe. It did not turn; the safe was locked.

"As far as I can see, they haven't touched this," said M. Formery.

"Thank goodness for that," said the Duke. "I believe, or at least my
fiancee does, that M. Gournay-Martin keeps the most precious thing in
his collection in that safe--the coronet."

"What! the famous coronet of the Princesse de Lamballe?" said M.
Formery.

"Yes," said the Duke.

"But according to your report, inspector, the letter signed 'Lupin'
announced that he was going to steal the coronet also."

"It did--in so many words," said the Duke.

"Well, here is a further proof that we're not dealing with Lupin. That
rascal would certainly have put his threat into execution, M. Formery,"
said the inspector.

"Who's in charge of the house?" said M. Formery.

"The concierge, his wife, and a housekeeper--a woman named Victoire,"
said the inspector.

"I'll see to the concierge and his wife presently. I've sent one of
your men round for their dossier. When I get it I'll question them. You
found them gagged and bound in their bedroom?"

"Yes, M. Formery; and always this imitation of Lupin--a yellow gag,
blue cords, and the motto, 'I take, therefore I am,' on a scrap of
cardboard--his usual bag of tricks."

"Then once again they're going to touch us up in the papers. It's any
odds on it," said M. Formery gloomily. "Where's the housekeeper? I
should like to see her."

"The fact is, we don't know where she is," said the inspector.

"You don't know where she is?" said M. Formery.

"We can't find her anywhere," said the inspector.

"That's excellent, excellent. We've found the accomplice," said M.
Formery with lively delight; and he rubbed his hands together. "At
least, we haven't found her, but we know her."

"I don't think that's the case," said the Duke. "At least, my future
father-in-law and my fiancee had both of them the greatest confidence
in her. Yesterday she telephoned to us at the Chateau de Charmerace.
All the jewels were left in her charge, and the wedding presents as
they were sent in."

"And these jewels and wedding presents--have they been stolen too?"
said M. Formery.

"They don't seem to have been touched," said the Duke, "though of
course we can't tell till M. Gournay-Martin arrives. As far as I can
see, the burglars have only touched these two drawing-rooms."

"That's very annoying," said M. Formery.

"I don't find it so," said the Duke, smiling.

"I was looking at it from the professional point of view," said M.
Formery. He turned to the inspector and added, "You can't have searched
thoroughly. This housekeeper must be somewhere about--if she's really
trustworthy. Have you looked in every room in the house?"

"In every room--under every bed--in every corner and every cupboard,"
said the inspector.

"Bother!" said M. Formery. "Are there no scraps of torn clothes, no
blood-stains, no traces of murder, nothing of interest?"

"Nothing!" said the inspector.

"But this is very regrettable," said M. Formery. "Where did she sleep?
Was her bed unmade?"

"Her room is at the top of the house," said the inspector. "The bed had
been slept in, but she does not appear to have taken away any of her
clothes."

"Extraordinary! This is beginning to look a very complicated business,"
said M. Formery gravely.

"Perhaps Guerchard will be able to throw a little more light on it,"
said the Duke.

M. Formery frowned and said, "Yes, yes. Guerchard is a good assistant
in a business like this. A little visionary, a little
fanciful--wrong-headed, in fact; but, after all, he IS Guerchard. Only,
since Lupin is his bugbear, he's bound to find some means of muddling
us up with that wretched animal. You're going to see Lupin mixed up
with all this to a dead certainty, your Grace."

The Duke looked at the signatures on the wall. "It seems to me that he
is pretty well mixed up with it already," he said quietly.

"Believe me, your Grace, in a criminal affair it is, above all things,
necessary to distrust appearances. I am growing more and more confident
that some ordinary burglars have committed this crime and are trying to
put us off the scent by diverting our attention to Lupin."

The Duke stooped down carelessly and picked up a book which had fallen
from a table.

"Excuse me, but please--please--do not touch anything," said M. Formery
quickly.

"Why, this is odd," said the Duke, staring at the floor.

"What is odd?" said M. Formery.

"Well, this book looks as if it had been knocked off the table by one
of the burglars. And look here; here's a footprint under it--a
footprint on the carpet," said the Duke.

M. Formery and the inspector came quickly to the spot. There, where the
book had fallen, plainly imprinted on the carpet, was a white
footprint. M. Formery and the inspector stared at it.

"It looks like plaster. How did plaster get here?" said M. Formery,
frowning at it.

"Well, suppose the robbers came from the garden," said the Duke.

"Of course they came from the garden, your Grace. Where else should
they come from?" said M. Formery, with a touch of impatience in his
tone.

"Well, at the end of the garden they're building a house," said the
Duke.

"Of course, of course," said M. Formery, taking him up quickly. "The
burglars came here with their boots covered with plaster. They've swept
away all the other marks of their feet from the carpet; but whoever did
the sweeping was too slack to lift up that book and sweep under it.
This footprint, however, is not of great importance, though it is
corroborative of all the other evidence we have that they came and went
by the garden. There's the ladder, and that table half out of the
window. Still, this footprint may turn out useful, after all. You had
better take the measurements of it, inspector. Here's a foot-rule for
you. I make a point of carrying this foot-rule about with me, your
Grace. You would be surprised to learn how often it has come in useful."

He took a little ivory foot-rule from his waist-coat pocket, and gave
it to the inspector, who fell on his knees and measured the footprint
with the greatest care.

"I must take a careful look at that house they're building. I shall
find a good many traces there, to a dead certainty," said M. Formery.

The inspector entered the measurements of the footprint in his
note-book. There came the sound of a knocking at the front door.

"I shall find footprints of exactly the same dimensions as this one at
the foot of some heap of plaster beside that house," said M. Formery;
with an air of profound conviction, pointing through the window to the
house building beyond the garden.

A policeman opened the door of the drawing-room and saluted.

"If you please, sir, the servants have arrived from Charmerace," he
said.

"Let them wait in the kitchen and the servants' offices," said M.
Formery. He stood silent, buried in profound meditation, for a couple
of minutes. Then he turned to the Duke and said, "What was that you
said about a theft of motor-cars at Charmerace?"

"When he received the letter from Arsene Lupin, M. Gournay-Martin
decided to start for Paris at once," said the Duke. "But when we sent
for the cars we found that they had just been stolen. M.
Gournay-Martin's chauffeur and another servant were in the garage
gagged and bound. Only an old car, a hundred horse-power Mercrac, was
left. I drove it to Paris, leaving M. Gournay-Martin and his family to
come on by train."

"Very important--very important indeed," said M. Formery. He thought
for a moment, and then added. "Were the motor-cars the only things
stolen? Were there no other thefts?"

"Well, as a matter of fact, there was another theft, or rather an
attempt at theft," said the Duke with some hesitation. "The rogues who
stole the motor-cars presented themselves at the chateau under the name
of Charolais--a father and three sons--on the pretext of buying the
hundred-horse-power Mercrac. M. Gournay-Martin had advertised it for
sale in the Rennes Advertiser. They were waiting in the big hall of the
chateau, which the family uses as the chief living-room, for the return
of M. Gournay-Martin. He came; and as they left the hall one of them
attempted to steal a pendant set with pearls which I had given to
Mademoiselle Gournay-Martin half an hour before. I caught him in the
act and saved the pendant."

"Good! good! Wait--we have one of the gang--wait till I question him,"
said M. Formery, rubbing his hands; and his eyes sparkled with joy.

"Well, no; I'm afraid we haven't," said the Duke in an apologetic tone.

"What! We haven't? Has he escaped from the police? Oh, those country
police!" cried M. Formery.

"No; I didn't charge him with the theft," said the Duke.

"You didn't charge him with the theft?" cried M. Formery, astounded.

"No; he was very young and he begged so hard. I had the pendant. I let
him go," said the Duke.

"Oh, your Grace, your Grace! Your duty to society!" cried M. Formery.

"Yes, it does seem to have been rather weak," said the Duke; "but there
you are. It's no good crying over spilt milk."

M. Formery folded his arms and walked, frowning, backwards and forwards
across the room.

He stopped, raised his hand with a gesture commanding attention, and
said, "I have no hesitation in saying that there is a connection--an
intimate connection--between the thefts at Charmerace and this
burglary!"

The Duke and the inspector gazed at him with respectful eyes--at least,
the eyes of the inspector were respectful; the Duke's eyes twinkled.

"I am gathering up the threads," said M. Formery. "Inspector, bring up
the concierge and his wife. I will question them on the scene of the
crime. Their dossier should be here. If it is, bring it up with them;
if not, no matter; bring them up without it."

The inspector left the drawing-room. M. Formery plunged at once into
frowning meditation.

"I find all this extremely interesting," said the Duke.

"Charmed! Charmed!" said M. Formery, waving his hand with an
absent-minded air.

The inspector entered the drawing-room followed by the concierge and
his wife. He handed a paper to M. Formery. The concierge, a bearded man
of about sixty, and his wife, a somewhat bearded woman of about
fifty-five, stared at M. Formery with fascinated, terrified eyes. He
sat down in a chair, crossed his legs, read the paper through, and then
scrutinized them keenly.

"Well, have you recovered from your adventure?" he said.

"Oh, yes, sir," said the concierge. "They hustled us a bit, but they
did not really hurt us."

"Nothing to speak of, that is," said his wife. "But all the same, it's
a disgraceful thing that an honest woman can't sleep in peace in her
bed of a night without being disturbed by rascals like that. And if the
police did their duty things like this wouldn't happen. And I don't
care who hears me say it."

"You say that you were taken by surprise in your sleep?" said M.
Formery. "You say you saw nothing, and heard nothing?"

"There was no time to see anything or hear anything. They trussed us up
like greased lightning," said the concierge.

"But the gag was the worst," said the wife. "To lie there and not be
able to tell the rascals what I thought about them!"

"Didn't you hear the noise of footsteps in the garden?" said M. Formery.

"One can't hear anything that happens in the garden from our bedroom,"
said the concierge.

"Even the night when Mlle. Germaine's great Dane barked from twelve
o'clock till seven in the morning, all the household was kept awake
except us; but bless you, sir, we slept like tops," said his wife
proudly.

"If they sleep like that it seems rather a waste of time to have gagged
them," whispered the Duke to the inspector.

The inspector grinned, and whispered scornfully, "Oh, them common
folks; they do sleep like that, your Grace."

"Didn't you hear any noise at the front door?" said M. Formery.

"No, we heard no noise at the door," said the concierge.

"Then you heard no noise at all the whole night?" said M. Formery.

"Oh, yes, sir, we heard noise enough after we'd been gagged," said the
concierge.

"Now, this is important," said M. Formery. "What kind of a noise was
it?"

"Well, it was a bumping kind of noise," said the concierge. "And there
was a noise of footsteps, walking about the room."

"What room? Where did these noises come from?" said M. Formery.

"From the room over our heads--the big drawing-room," said the
concierge.

"Didn't you hear any noise of a struggle, as if somebody was being
dragged about--no screaming or crying?" said M. Formery.

The concierge and his wife looked at one another with inquiring eyes.

"No, I didn't," said the concierge.

"Neither did I," said his wife.

M. Formery paused. Then he said, "How long have you been in the service
of M. Gournay-Martin?"

"A little more than a year," said the concierge.

M. Formery looked at the paper in his hand, frowned, and said severely,
"I see you've been convicted twice, my man."

"Yes, sir, but--"

"My husband's an honest man, sir--perfectly honest," broke in his wife.
"You've only to ask M. Gournay-Martin; he'll--"

"Be so good as to keep quiet, my good woman," said M. Formery; and,
turning to her husband, he went on: "At your first conviction you were
sentenced to a day's imprisonment with costs; at your second conviction
you got three days' imprisonment."

"I'm not going to deny it, sir," said the concierge; "but it was an
honourable imprisonment."

"Honourable?" said M. Formery.

"The first time, I was a gentleman's servant, and I got a day's
imprisonment for crying, 'Hurrah for the General Strike!'--on the first
of May."

"You were a valet? In whose service?" said M. Formery.

"In the service of M. Genlis, the Socialist leader."

"And your second conviction?" said M. Formery.

"It was for having cried in the porch of Ste. Clotilde, 'Down with the
cows!'--meaning the police, sir," said the concierge.

"And were you in the service of M. Genlis then?" said M. Formery.

"No, sir; I was in the service of M. Bussy-Rabutin, the Royalist
deputy."

"You don't seem to have very well-defined political convictions," said
M. Formery.

"Oh, yes, sir, I have," the concierge protested. "I'm always devoted to
my masters; and I have the same opinions that they have--always."

"Very good; you can go," said M. Formery.

The concierge and his wife left the room, looking as if they did not
quite know whether to feel relieved or not.

"Those two fools are telling the exact truth, unless I'm very much
mistaken," said M. Formery.

"They look honest enough people," said the Duke.

"Well, now to examine the rest of the house," said M. Formery.

"I'll come with you, if I may," said the Duke.

"By all means, by all means," said M. Formery.

"I find it all so interesting," said the Duke,




CHAPTER X

GUERCHARD ASSISTS


Leaving a policeman on guard at the door of the drawing-room M.
Formery, the Duke, and the inspector set out on their tour of
inspection. It was a long business, for M. Formery examined every room
with the most scrupulous care--with more care, indeed, than he had
displayed in his examination of the drawing-rooms. In particular he
lingered long in the bedroom of Victoire, discussing the possibilities
of her having been murdered and carried away by the burglars along with
their booty. He seemed, if anything, disappointed at finding no
blood-stains, but to find real consolation in the thought that she
might have been strangled. He found the inspector in entire agreement
with every theory he enunciated, and he grew more and more disposed to
regard him as a zealous and trustworthy officer. Also he was not at all
displeased at enjoying this opportunity of impressing the Duke with his
powers of analysis and synthesis. He was unaware that, as a rule, the
Duke's eyes did not usually twinkle as they twinkled during this solemn
and deliberate progress through the house of M. Gournay-Martin. M.
Formery had so exactly the air of a sleuthhound; and he was even
noisier.

Having made this thorough examination of the house, M. Formery went out
into the garden and set about examining that. There were footprints on
the turf about the foot of the ladder, for the grass was close-clipped,
and the rain had penetrated and softened the soil; but there were
hardly as many footprints as might have been expected, seeing that the
burglars must have made many journeys in the course of robbing the
drawing-rooms of so many objects of art, some of them of considerable
weight. The footprints led to a path of hard gravel; and M. Formery led
the way down it, out of the door in the wall at the bottom of the
garden, and into the space round the house which was being built.

As M. Formery had divined, there was a heap, or, to be exact, there
were several heaps of plaster about the bottom of the scaffolding.
Unfortunately, there were also hundreds of footprints. M. Formery
looked at them with longing eyes; but he did not suggest that the
inspector should hunt about for a set of footprints of the size of the
one he had so carefully measured on the drawing-room carpet.

While they were examining the ground round the half-built house a man
came briskly down the stairs from the second floor of the house of M.
Gournay-Martin. He was an ordinary-looking man, almost insignificant,
of between forty and fifty, and of rather more than middle height. He
had an ordinary, rather shapeless mouth, an ordinary nose, an ordinary
chin, an ordinary forehead, rather low, and ordinary ears. He was
wearing an ordinary top-hat, by no means new. His clothes were the
ordinary clothes of a fairly well-to-do citizen; and his boots had been
chosen less to set off any slenderness his feet might possess than for
their comfortable roominess. Only his eyes relieved his face from
insignificance. They were extraordinarily alert eyes, producing in
those on whom they rested the somewhat uncomfortable impression that
the depths of their souls were being penetrated. He was the famous
Chief-Inspector Guerchard, head of the Detective Department of the
Prefecture of Police, and sworn foe of Arsene Lupin.

The policeman at the door of the drawing-room saluted him briskly. He
was a fine, upstanding, red-faced young fellow, adorned by a rich black
moustache of extraordinary fierceness.

"Shall I go and inform M. Formery that you have come, M. Guerchard?" he
said.

"No, no; there's no need to take the trouble," said Guerchard in a
gentle, rather husky voice. "Don't bother any one about me--I'm of no
importance."

"Oh, come, M. Guerchard," protested the policeman.

"Of no importance," said M. Guerchard decisively. "For the present, M.
Formery is everything. I'm only an assistant."

He stepped into the drawing-room and stood looking about it, curiously
still. It was almost as if the whole of his being was concentrated in
the act of seeing--as if all the other functions of his mind and body
were in suspension.

"M. Formery and the inspector have just been up to examine the
housekeeper's room. It's right at the top of the house--on the second
floor. You take the servants' staircase. Then it's right at the end of
the passage on the left. Would you like me to take you up to it, sir?"
said the policeman eagerly. His heart was in his work.

"Thank you, I know where it is--I've just come from it," said Guerchard
gently.

A grin of admiration widened the already wide mouth of the policeman,
and showed a row of very white, able-looking teeth.

"Ah, M. Guerchard!" he said, "you're cleverer than all the examining
magistrates in Paris put together!"

"You ought not to say that, my good fellow. I can't prevent you
thinking it, of course; but you ought not to say it," said Guerchard
with husky gentleness; and the faintest smile played round the corners
of his mouth.

He walked slowly to the window, and the policeman walked with him.

"Have you noticed this, sir?" said the policeman, taking hold of the
top of the ladder with a powerful hand. "It's probable that the
burglars came in and went away by this ladder."

"Thank you," said Guerchard.

"They have even left this card-table on the window-sill," said the
policeman; and he patted the card-table with his other powerful hand.

"Thank you, thank you," said Guerchard.

"They don't think it's Lupin's work at all," said the policeman. "They
think that Lupin's letter announcing the burglary and these signatures
on the walls are only a ruse."

"Is that so?" said Guerchard.

"Is there any way I can help you, sir?" said policeman.

"Yes," said Guerchard. "Take up your post outside that door and admit
no one but M. Formery, the inspector, Bonavent, or Dieusy, without
consulting me." And he pointed to the drawing-room door.

"Shan't I admit the Duke of Charmerace? He's taking a great interest in
this affair," said the policeman.

"The Duke of Charmerace? Oh, yes--admit the Duke of Charmerace," said
Guerchard.

The policeman went to his post of responsibility, a proud man.

Hardly had the door closed behind him when Guerchard was all
activity--activity and eyes. He examined the ladder, the gaps on the
wall from which the pictures had been taken, the signatures of Arsene
Lupin. The very next thing he did was to pick up the book which the
Duke had set on the top of the footprint again, to preserve it; and he
measured, pacing it, the distance between the footprint and the window.

The result of this measuring did not appear to cause him any
satisfaction, for he frowned, measured the distance again, and then
stared out of the window with a perplexed air, thinking hard. It was
curious that, when he concentrated himself on a process of reasoning,
his eves seemed to lose something of their sharp brightness and grew a
little dim.

At last he seemed to come to some conclusion. He turned away from the
window, drew a small magnifying-glass from his pocket, dropped on his
hands and knees, and began to examine the surface of the carpet with
the most minute care.

He examined a space of it nearly six feet square, stopped, and gazed
round the room. His eyes rested on the fireplace, which he could see
under the bottom of the big tapestried fire-screen which was raised on
legs about a foot high, fitted with big casters. His eyes filled with
interest; without rising, he crawled quickly across the room, peeped
round the edge of the screen and rose, smiling.

He went on to the further drawing-room and made the same careful
examination of it, again examining a part of the surface of the carpet
with his magnifying-glass. He came back to the window to which the
ladder had been raised and examined very carefully the broken shutter.
He whistled softly to himself, lighted a cigarette, and leant against
the side of the window. He looked out of it, with dull eyes which saw
nothing, the while his mind worked upon the facts he had discovered.

He had stood there plunged in reflection for perhaps ten minutes, when
there came a sound of voices and footsteps on the stairs. He awoke from
his absorption, seemed to prick his ears, then slipped a leg over the
window-ledge, and disappeared from sight down the ladder.

The door opened, and in came M. Formery, the Duke, and the inspector.
M. Formery looked round the room with eyes which seemed to expect to
meet a familiar sight, then walked to the other drawing-room and looked
round that. He turned to the policeman, who had stepped inside the
drawing-room, and said sharply, "M. Guerchard is not here."

"I left him here," said the policeman. "He must have disappeared. He's
a wonder."

"Of course," said M. Formery. "He has gone down the ladder to examine
that house they're building. He's just following in our tracks and
doing all over again the work we've already done. He might have saved
himself the trouble. We could have told him all he wants to know. But
there! He very likely would not be satisfied till he had seen
everything for himself."

"He may see something which we have missed," said the Duke.

M. Formery frowned, and said sharply "That's hardly likely. I don't
think that your Grace realizes to what a perfection constant practice
brings one's power of observation. The inspector and I will cheerfully
eat anything we've missed--won't we, inspector?" And he laughed
heartily at his joke.

"It might always prove a large mouthful," said the Duke with an
ironical smile.

M. Formery assumed his air of profound reflection, and walked a few
steps up and down the room, frowning:

"The more I think about it," he said, "the clearer it grows that we
have disposed of the Lupin theory. This is the work of far less expert
rogues than Lupin. What do you think, inspector?"

"Yes; I think you have disposed of that theory, sir," said the
inspector with ready acquiescence.

"All the same, I'd wager anything that we haven't disposed of it to the
satisfaction of Guerchard," said M. Formery.

"Then he must be very hard to satisfy," said the Duke.

"Oh, in any other matter he's open to reason," said M. Formery; "but
Lupin is his fixed idea; it's an obsession--almost a mania."

"But yet he never catches him," said the Duke.

"No; and he never will. His very obsession by Lupin hampers him. It
cramps his mind and hinders its working," said M. Formery.

He resumed his meditative pacing, stopped again, and said:

"But considering everything, especially the absence of any traces of
violence, combined with her entire disappearance, I have come to
another conclusion. Victoire is the key to the mystery. She is the
accomplice. She never slept in her bed. She unmade it to put us off the
scent. That, at any rate, is something gained, to have found the
accomplice. We shall have this good news, at least, to tell M,
Gournay-Martin on his arrival."

"Do you really think that she's the accomplice?" said the Duke.

"I'm dead sure of it," said M. Formery. "We will go up to her room and
make another thorough examination of it."

Guerchard's head popped up above the window-sill:

"My dear M. Formery," he said, "I beg that you will not take the
trouble."

M. Formery's mouth opened: "What! You, Guerchard?" he stammered.

"Myself," said Guerchard; and he came to the top of the ladder and
slipped lightly over the window-sill into the room.

He shook hands with M. Formery and nodded to the inspector. Then he
looked at the Duke with an air of inquiry.

"Let me introduce you," said M. Formery. "Chief-Inspector Guerchard,
head of the Detective Department--the Duke of Charmerace."

The Duke shook hands with Guerchard, saying, "I'm delighted to make
your acquaintance, M. Guerchard. I've been expecting your coming with
the greatest interest. Indeed it was I who begged the officials at the
Prefecture of Police to put this case in your hands. I insisted on it."

"What were you doing on that ladder?" said M. Formery, giving Guerchard
no time to reply to the Duke.

"I was listening," said Guerchard simply--"listening. I like to hear
people talk when I'm engaged on a case. It's a distraction--and it
helps. I really must congratulate you, my dear M. Formery, on the
admirable manner in which you have conducted this inquiry."

M. Formery bowed, and regarded him with a touch of suspicion.

"There are one or two minor points on which we do not agree, but on the
whole your method has been admirable," said Guerchard.

"Well, about Victoire," said M. Formery. "You're quite sure that an
examination, a more thorough examination, of her room, is unnecessary?"

"Yes, I think so," said Guerchard. "I have just looked at it myself."

The door opened, and in came Bonavent, one of the detectives who had
come earlier from the Prefecture. In his hand he carried a scrap of
cloth.

He saluted Guerchard, and said to M. Formery, "I have just found this
scrap of cloth on the edge of the well at the bottom of the garden. The
concierge's wife tells me that it has been torn from Victoire's dress."

"I feared it," said M. Formery, taking the scrap of cloth from him. "I
feared foul play. We must go to the well at once, send some one down
it, or have it dragged."

He was moving hastily to the door, when Guerchard said, in his husky,
gentle voice, "I don't think there is any need to look for Victoire in
the well."

"But this scrap of cloth," said M. Formery, holding it out to him.

"Yes, yes, that scrap of cloth," said Guerchard. And, turning to the
Duke, he added, "Do you know if there's a dog or cat in the house, your
Grace? I suppose that, as the fiance of Mademoiselle Gournay-Martin,
you are familiar with the house?"

"What on earth--" said M. Formery.

"Excuse me," interrupted Guerchard. "But this is important--very
important."

"Yes, there is a cat," said the Duke. "I've seen a cat at the door of
the concierge's rooms."

"It must have been that cat which took this scrap of cloth to the edge
of the well," said Guerchard gravely.

"This is ridiculous--preposterous!" cried M. Formery, beginning to
flush. "Here we're dealing with a most serious crime--a murder--the
murder of Victoire--and you talk about cats!"

"Victoire has not been murdered," said Guerchard; and his husky voice
was gentler than ever, only just audible.

"But we don't know that--we know nothing of the kind," said M. Formery.

"I do," said Guerchard.

"You?" said M. Formery.

"Yes," said Guerchard.

"Then how do you explain her disappearance?"

"If she had disappeared I shouldn't explain it," said Guerchard.

"But since she has disappeared?" cried M. Formery, in a tone of
exasperation.

"She hasn't," said Guerchard.

"You know nothing about it!" cried M. Formery, losing his temper.

"Yes, I do," said Guerchard, with the same gentleness.

"Come, do you mean to say that you know where she is?" cried M. Formery.

"Certainly," said Guerchard.

"Do you mean to tell us straight out that you've seen her?" cried M.
Formery.

"Oh, yes; I've seen her," said Guerchard.

"You've seen her--when?" cried M. Formery.

Guerchard paused to consider. Then he said gently:

"It must have been between four and five minutes ago."

"But hang it all, you haven't been out of this room!" cried M. Formery.

"No, I haven't," said Guerchard.

"And you've seen her?" cried M. Formery.

"Yes," said Guerchard, raising his voice a little.

"Well, why the devil don't you tell us where she is? Tell us!" cried M.
Formery, purple with exasperation.

"But you won't let me get a word out of my mouth," protested Guerchard
with aggravating gentleness.

"Well, speak!" cried M. Formery; and he sank gasping on to a chair.

"Ah, well, she's here," said Guerchard.

"Here! How did she GET here?" said M. Formery.

"On a mattress," said Guerchard.

M. Formery sat upright, almost beside himself, glaring furiously at
Guerchard:

"What do you stand there pulling all our legs for?" he almost howled.

"Look here," said Guerchard.

He walked across the room to the fireplace, pushed the chairs which
stood bound together on the hearth-rug to one side of the fireplace,
and ran the heavy fire-screen on its casters to the other side of it,
revealing to their gaze the wide, old-fashioned fireplace itself. The
iron brazier which held the coals had been moved into the corner, and a
mattress lay on the floor of the fireplace. On the mattress lay the
figure of a big, middle-aged woman, half-dressed. There was a yellow
gag in her mouth; and her hands and feet were bound together with blue
cords.

"She is sleeping soundly," said Guerchard. He stooped and picked up a
handkerchief, and smelt it. "There's the handkerchief they chloroformed
her with. It still smells of chloroform."

They stared at him and the sleeping woman.

"Lend a hand, inspector," he said. "And you too, Bonavent. She looks a
good weight."

The three of them raised the mattress, and carried it and the sleeping
woman to a broad couch, and laid them on it. They staggered under their
burden, for truly Victoire was a good weight.

M. Formery rose, with recovered breath, but with his face an even
richer purple. His eyes were rolling in his head, as if they were not
under proper control.

He turned on the inspector and cried savagely, "You never examined the
fireplace, inspector!"

"No, sir," said the downcast inspector.

"It was unpardonable--absolutely unpardonable!" cried M. Formery. "How
is one to work with subordinates like this?"

"It was an oversight," said Guerchard.

M. Formery turned to him and said, "You must admit that it was
materially impossible for me to see her."

"It was possible if you went down on all fours," said Guerchard.

"On all fours?" said M. Formery.

"Yes; on all fours you could see her heels sticking out beyond the
mattress," said Guerchard simply.

M. Formery shrugged his shoulders: "That screen looked as if it had
stood there since the beginning of the summer," he said.

"The first thing, when you're dealing with Lupin, is to distrust
appearances," said Guerchard.

"Lupin!" cried M. Formery hotly. Then he bit his lip and was silent.

He walked to the side of the couch and looked down on the sleeping
Victoire, frowning: "This upsets everything," he said. "With these new
conditions, I've got to begin all over again, to find a new explanation
of the affair. For the moment--for the moment, I'm thrown completely
off the track. And you, Guerchard?"

"Oh, well," said Guerchard, "I have an idea or two about the matter
still."

"Do you really mean to say that it hasn't thrown you off the track
too?" said M. Formery, with a touch of incredulity in his tone.

"Well, no--not exactly," said Guerchard. "I wasn't on that track, you
see."

"No, of course not--of course not. You were on the track of Lupin,"
said M. Formery; and his contemptuous smile was tinged with malice.

The Duke looked from one to the other of them with curious, searching
eyes: "I find all this so interesting," he said.

"We do not take much notice of these checks; they do not depress us for
a moment," said M. Formery, with some return of his old grandiloquence.
"We pause hardly for an instant; then we begin to reconstruct--to
reconstruct."

"It's perfectly splendid of you," said the Duke, and his limpid eyes
rested on M. Formery's self-satisfied face in a really affectionate
gaze; they might almost be said to caress it.

Guerchard looked out of the window at a man who was carrying a hod-full
of bricks up one of the ladders set against the scaffolding of the
building house. Something in this honest workman's simple task seemed
to amuse him, for he smiled.

Only the inspector, thinking of the unexamined fireplace, looked really
depressed.

"We shan't get anything out of this woman till she wakes," said M.
Formery, "When she does, I shall question her closely and fully. In the
meantime, she may as well be carried up to her bedroom to sleep off the
effects of the chloroform."

Guerchard turned quickly: "Not her own bedroom, I think," he said
gently.

"Certainly not--of course, not her own bedroom," said M. Formery
quickly.

"And I think an officer at the door of whatever bedroom she does sleep
in," said Guerchard.

"Undoubtedly--most necessary," said M. Formery gravely. "See to it,
inspector. You can take her away."

The inspector called in a couple of policemen, and with their aid he
and Bonavent raised the sleeping woman, a man at each corner of the
mattress, and bore her from the room.

"And now to reconstruct," said M. Formery; and he folded his arms and
plunged into profound reflection.

The Duke and Guerchard watched him in silence.




CHAPTER XI

THE FAMILY ARRIVES


In carrying out Victoire, the inspector had left the door of the
drawing-room open. After he had watched M. Formery reflect for two
minutes, Guerchard faded--to use an expressive Americanism--through it.
The Duke felt in the breast-pocket of his coat, murmured softly, "My
cigarettes," and followed him.

He caught up Guerchard on the stairs and said, "I will come with you,
if I may, M. Guerchard. I find all these investigations extraordinarily
interesting. I have been observing M. Formery's methods--I should like
to watch yours, for a change."

"By all means," said Guerchard. "And there are several things I want to
hear about from your Grace. Of course it might be an advantage to
discuss them together with M. Formery, but--" and he hesitated.

"It would be a pity to disturb M. Formery in the middle of the process
of reconstruction," said the Duke; and a faint, ironical smile played
round the corners of his sensitive lips.

Guerchard looked at him quickly: "Perhaps it would," he said.

They went through the house, out of the back door, and into the garden.
Guerchard moved about twenty yards from the house, then he stopped and
questioned the Duke at great length. He questioned him first about the
Charolais, their appearance, their actions, especially about Bernard's
attempt to steal the pendant, and the theft of the motor-cars.

"I have been wondering whether M. Charolais might not have been Arsene
Lupin himself," said the Duke.

"It's quite possible," said Guerchard. "There seem to be no limits
whatever to Lupin's powers of disguising himself. My colleague,
Ganimard, has come across him at least three times that he knows of, as
a different person. And no single time could he be sure that it was the
same man. Of course, he had a feeling that he was in contact with some
one he had met before, but that was all. He had no certainty. He may
have met him half a dozen times besides without knowing him. And the
photographs of him--they're all different. Ganimard declares that Lupin
is so extraordinarily successful in his disguises because he is a great
actor. He actually becomes for the time being the person he pretends to
be. He thinks and feels absolutely like that person. Do you follow me?"

"Oh, yes; but he must be rather fluid, this Lupin," said the Duke; and
then he added thoughtfully, "It must be awfully risky to come so often
into actual contact with men like Ganimard and you."

"Lupin has never let any consideration of danger prevent him doing
anything that caught his fancy. He has odd fancies, too. He's a
humourist of the most varied kind--grim, ironic, farcical, as the mood
takes him. He must be awfully trying to live with," said Guerchard.

"Do you think humourists are trying to live with?" said the Duke, in a
meditative tone. "I think they brighten life a good deal; but of course
there are people who do not like them--the middle-classes."

"Yes, yes, they're all very well in their place; but to live with they
must be trying," said Guerchard quickly.

He went on to question the Duke closely and at length about the
household of M. Gournay-Martin, saying that Arsene Lupin worked with
the largest gang a burglar had ever captained, and it was any odds that
he had introduced one, if not more, of that gang into it. Moreover, in
the case of a big affair like this, Lupin himself often played two or
three parts under as many disguises.

"If he was Charolais, I don't see how he could be one of M.
Gournay-Martin's household, too," said the Duke in some perplexity.

"I don't say that he WAS Charolais," said Guerchard. "It is quite a
moot point. On the whole, I'm inclined to think that he was not. The
theft of the motor-cars was a job for a subordinate. He would hardly
bother himself with it."

The Duke told him all that he could remember about the millionaire's
servants--and, under the clever questioning of the detective, he was
surprised to find how much he did remember--all kinds of odd details
about them which he had scarcely been aware of observing.

The two of them, as they talked, afforded an interesting contrast: the
Duke, with his air of distinction and race, his ironic expression, his
mobile features, his clear enunciation and well-modulated voice, his
easy carriage of an accomplished fencer--a fencer with muscles of
steel--seemed to be a man of another kind from the slow-moving
detective, with his husky voice, his common, slurring enunciation, his
clumsily moulded features, so ill adapted to the expression of emotion
and intelligence. It was a contrast almost between the hawk and the
mole, the warrior and the workman. Only in their eyes were they alike;
both of them had the keen, alert eyes of observers. Perhaps the most
curious thing of all was that, in spite of the fact that he had for so
much of his life been an idler, trifling away his time in the pursuit
of pleasure, except when he had made his expedition to the South Pole,
the Duke gave one the impression of being a cleverer man, of a far
finer brain, than the detective who had spent so much of his life
sharpening his wits on the more intricate problems of crime.

When Guerchard came to the end of his questions, the Duke said: "You
have given me a very strong feeling that it is going to be a deuce of a
job to catch Lupin. I don't wonder that, so far, you have none of you
laid hands on him."

"But we have!" cried Guerchard quickly. "Twice Ganimard has caught him.
Once he had him in prison, and actually brought him to trial. Lupin
became another man, and was let go from the very dock."

"Really? It sounds absolutely amazing," said the Duke.

"And then, in the affair of the Blue Diamond, Ganimard caught him
again. He has his weakness, Lupin--it's women. It's a very common
weakness in these masters of crime. Ganimard and Holmlock Shears, in
that affair, got the better of him by using his love for a woman--'the
fair-haired lady,' she was called--to nab him."

"A shabby trick," said the Duke.

"Shabby?" said Guerchard in a tone of utter wonder. "How can anything
be shabby in the case of a rogue like this?"

"Perhaps not--perhaps not--still--" said the Duke, and stopped.

The expression of wonder faded from Guerchard's face, and he went on,
"Well, Holmlock Shears recovered the Blue Diamond, and Ganimard nabbed
Lupin. He held him for ten minutes, then Lupin escaped."

"What became of the fair-haired lady?" said the Duke.

"I don't know. I have heard that she is dead," said Guerchard. "Now I
come to think of it, I heard quite definitely that she died."

"It must be awful for a woman to love a man like Lupin--the constant,
wearing anxiety," said the Duke thoughtfully.

"I dare say. Yet he can have his pick of sweethearts. I've been offered
thousands of francs by women--women of your Grace's world and wealthy
Viennese--to make them acquainted with Lupin," said Guerchard.

"You don't surprise me," said the Duke with his ironic smile. "Women
never do stop to think--where one of their heroes is concerned. And did
you do it?"

"How could I? If I only could! If I could find Lupin entangled with a
woman like Ganimard did--well--" said Guerchard between his teeth.

"He'd never get out of YOUR clutches," said the Duke with conviction.

"I think not--I think not," said Guerchard grimly. "But come, I may as
well get on."

He walked across the turf to the foot of the ladder and looked at the
footprints round it. He made but a cursory examination of them, and
took his way down the garden-path, out of the door in the wall into the
space about the house that was building. He was not long examining it,
and he went right through it out into the street on which the house
would face when it was finished. He looked up and down it, and began to
retrace his footsteps.

"I've seen all I want to see out here. We may as well go back to the
house," he said to the Duke.

"I hope you've seen what you expected to see," said the Duke.

"Exactly what I expected to see--exactly," said Guerchard.

"That's as it should be," said the Duke.

They went back to the house and found M. Formery in the drawing-room,
still engaged in the process of reconstruction.

"The thing to do now is to hunt the neighbourhood for witnesses of the
departure of the burglars with their booty. Loaded as they were with
such bulky objects, they must have had a big conveyance. Somebody must
have noticed it. They must have wondered why it was standing in front
of a half-built house. Somebody may have actually seen the burglars
loading it, though it was so early in the morning. Bonavent had better
inquire at every house in the street on which that half-built house
faces. Did you happen to notice the name of it?" said M. Formery.

"It's Sureau Street," said Guerchard. "But Dieusy has been hunting the
neighbourhood for some one who saw the burglars loading their
conveyance, or saw it waiting to be loaded, for the last hour."

"Good," said M. Formery. "We are getting on."

M. Formery was silent. Guerchard and the Duke sat down and lighted
cigarettes.

"You found plenty of traces," said M. Formery, waving his hand towards
the window.

"Yes; I've found plenty of traces," said Guerchard.

"Of Lupin?" said M. Formery, with a faint sneer.

"No; not of Lupin," said Guerchard.

A smile of warm satisfaction illumined M. Formery's face:

"What did I tell you?" he said. "I'm glad that you've changed your mind
about that."

"I have hardly changed my mind," said Guerchard, in his husky, gentle
voice.

There came a loud knocking on the front door, the sound of excited
voices on the stairs. The door opened, and in burst M. Gournay-Martin.
He took one glance round the devastated room, raised his clenched hands
towards the ceiling, and bellowed, "The scoundrels! the dirty
scoundrels!" And his voice stuck in his throat. He tottered across the
room to a couch, dropped heavily to it, gazed round the scene of
desolation, and burst into tears.

Germaine and Sonia came into the room. The Duke stepped forward to
greet them.

"Do stop crying, papa. You're as hoarse as a crow as it is," said
Germaine impatiently. Then, turning on the Duke with a frown, she said:
"I think that joke of yours about the train was simply disgraceful,
Jacques. A joke's a joke, but to send us out to the station on a night
like last night, through all that heavy rain, when you knew all the
time that there was no quarter-to-nine train--it was simply
disgraceful."

"I really don't know what you're talking about," said the Duke quietly.
"Wasn't there a quarter-to-nine train?"

"Of course there wasn't," said Germaine. "The time-table was years old.
I think it was the most senseless attempt at a joke I ever heard of."

"It doesn't seem to me to be a joke at all," said the Duke quietly. "At
any rate, it isn't the kind of a joke I make--it would be detestable. I
never thought to look at the date of the time-table. I keep a box of
cigarettes in that drawer, and I have noticed the time-table there. Of
course, it may have been lying there for years. It was stupid of me not
to look at the date."

"I said it was a mistake. I was sure that his Grace would not do
anything so unkind as that," said Sonia.

The Duke smiled at her.

"Well, all I can say is, it was very stupid of you not to look at the
date," said Germaine.

M. Gournay-Martin rose to his feet and wailed, in the most heartrending
fashion: "My pictures! My wonderful pictures! Such investments! And my
cabinets! My Renaissance cabinets! They can't be replaced! They were
unique! They were worth a hundred and fifty thousand francs."

M. Formery stepped forward with an air and said, "I am distressed, M.
Gournay-Martin--truly distressed by your loss. I am M. Formery,
examining magistrate."

"It is a tragedy, M. Formery--a tragedy!" groaned the millionaire.

"Do not let it upset you too much. We shall find your masterpieces--we
shall find them. Only give us time," said M. Formery in a tone of warm
encouragement.

The face of the millionaire brightened a little.

"And, after all, you have the consolation, that the burglars did not
get hold of the gem of your collection. They have not stolen the
coronet of the Princesse de Lamballe," said M. Formery.

"No," said the Duke. "They have not touched this safe. It is unopened."

"What has that got to do with it?" growled the millionaire quickly.
"That safe is empty."

"Empty ... but your coronet?" cried the Duke.

"Good heavens! Then they HAVE stolen it," cried the millionaire
hoarsely, in a panic-stricken voice.

"But they can't have--this safe hasn't been touched," said the Duke.

"But the coronet never was in that safe. It was--have they entered my
bedroom?" said the millionaire.

"No," said M. Formery.

"They don't seem to have gone through any of the rooms except these
two," said the Duke.

"Ah, then my mind is at rest about that. The safe in my bedroom has
only two keys. Here is one." He took a key from his waistcoat pocket
and held it out to them. "And the other is in this safe."

The face of M. Formery was lighted up with a splendid satisfaction. He
might have rescued the coronet with his own hands. He cried
triumphantly, "There, you see!"

"See? See?" cried the millionaire in a sudden bellow. "I see that they
have robbed me--plundered me. Oh, my pictures! My wonderful pictures!
Such investments!"




CHAPTER XII

THE THEFT OF THE PENDANT


They stood round the millionaire observing his anguish, with eyes in
which shone various degrees of sympathy. As if no longer able to bear
the sight of such woe, Sonia slipped out of the room.

The millionaire lamented his loss and abused the thieves by turns, but
always at the top of his magnificent voice.

Suddenly a fresh idea struck him. He clapped his hand to his brow and
cried: "That eight hundred pounds! Charolais will never buy the Mercrac
now! He was not a bona fide purchaser!"

The Duke's lips parted slightly and his eyes opened a trifle wider than
their wont. He turned sharply on his heel, and almost sprang into the
other drawing-room. There he laughed at his ease.

M. Formery kept saying to the millionaire: "Be calm, M. Gournay-Martin.
Be calm! We shall recover your masterpieces. I pledge you my word. All
we need is time. Have patience. Be calm!"

His soothing remonstrances at last had their effect. The millionaire
grew calm:

"Guerchard?" he said. "Where is Guerchard?"

M. Formery presented Guerchard to him.

"Are you on their track? Have you a clue?" said the millionaire.

"I think," said M. Formery in an impressive tone, "that we may now
proceed with the inquiry in the ordinary way."

He was a little piqued by the millionaire's so readily turning from him
to the detective. He went to a writing-table, set some sheets of paper
before him, and prepared to make notes on the answers to his questions.
The Duke came back into the drawing-room; the inspector was summoned.
M. Gournay-Martin sat down on a couch with his hands on his knees and
gazed gloomily at M. Formery. Germaine, who was sitting on a couch near
the door, waiting with an air of resignation for her father to cease
his lamentations, rose and moved to a chair nearer the writing-table.
Guerchard kept moving restlessly about the room, but noiselessly. At
last he came to a standstill, leaning against the wall behind M.
Formery.

M. Formery went over all the matters about which he had already
questioned the Duke. He questioned the millionaire and his daughter
about the Charolais, the theft of the motor-cars, and the attempted
theft of the pendant. He questioned them at less length about the
composition of their household--the servants and their characters. He
elicited no new fact.

He paused, and then he said, carelessly as a mere matter of routine: "I
should like to know, M. Gournay-Martin, if there has ever been any
other robbery committed at your house?"

"Three years ago this scoundrel Lupin--" the millionaire began
violently.

"Yes, yes; I know all about that earlier burglary. But have you been
robbed since?" said M. Formery, interrupting him.

"No, I haven't been robbed since that burglary; but my daughter has,"
said the millionaire.

"Your daughter?" said M. Formery.

"Yes; I have been robbed two or three times during the last three
years," said Germaine.

"Dear me! But you ought to have told us about this before. This is
extremely interesting, and most important," said M. Formery, rubbing
his hands, "I suppose you suspect Victoire?"

"No, I don't," said Germaine quickly. "It couldn't have been Victoire.
The last two thefts were committed at the chateau when Victoire was in
Paris in charge of this house."

M. Formery seemed taken aback, and he hesitated, consulting his notes.
Then he said: "Good--good. That confirms my hypothesis."

"What hypothesis?" said M. Gournay-Martin quickly.

"Never mind--never mind," said M. Formery solemnly. And, turning to
Germaine, he went on: "You say, Mademoiselle, that these thefts began
about three years ago?"

"Yes, I think they began about three years ago in August."

"Let me see. It was in the month of August, three years ago, that your
father, after receiving a threatening letter like the one he received
last night, was the victim of a burglary?" said M. Formery.

"Yes, it was--the scoundrels!" cried the millionaire fiercely.

"Well, it would be interesting to know which of your servants entered
your service three years ago," said M. Formery.

"Victoire has only been with us a year at the outside," said Germaine.

"Only a year?" said M. Formery quickly, with an air of some vexation.
He paused and added, "Exactly--exactly. And what was the nature of the
last theft of which you were the victim?"

"It was a pearl brooch--not unlike the pendant which his Grace gave me
yesterday," said Germaine.

"Would you mind showing me that pendant? I should like to see it," said
M. Formery.

"Certainly--show it to him, Jacques. You have it, haven't you?" said
Germaine, turning to the Duke.

"Me? No. How should I have it?" said the Duke in some surprise.
"Haven't you got it?"

"I've only got the case--the empty case," said Germaine, with a
startled air.

"The empty case?" said the Duke, with growing surprise.

"Yes," said Germaine. "It was after we came back from our useless
journey to the station. I remembered suddenly that I had started
without the pendant. I went to the bureau and picked up the case; and
it was empty."

"One moment--one moment," said M. Formery. "Didn't you catch this young
Bernard Charolais with this case in his hands, your Grace?"

"Yes," said the Duke. "I caught him with it in his pocket."

"Then you may depend upon it that the young rascal had slipped the
pendant out of its case and you only recovered the empty case from
him," said M. Formery triumphantly.

"No," said the Duke. "That is not so. Nor could the thief have been the
burglar who broke open the bureau to get at the keys. For long after
both of them were out of the house I took a cigarette from the box
which stood on the bureau beside the case which held the pendant. And
it occurred to me that the young rascal might have played that very
trick on me. I opened the case and the pendant was there."

"It has been stolen!" cried the millionaire; "of course it has been
stolen."

"Oh, no, no," said the Duke. "It hasn't been stolen. Irma, or perhaps
Mademoiselle Kritchnoff, has brought it to Paris for Germaine."

"Sonia certainly hasn't brought it. It was she who suggested to me that
you had seen it lying on the bureau, and slipped it into your pocket,"
said Germaine quickly.

"Then it must be Irma," said the Duke.

"We had better send for her and make sure," said M. Formery.
"Inspector, go and fetch her."

The inspector went out of the room and the Duke questioned Germaine and
her father about the journey, whether it had been very uncomfortable,
and if they were very tired by it. He learned that they had been so
fortunate as to find sleeping compartments on the train, so that they
had suffered as little as might be from their night of travel.

M. Formery looked through his notes; Guerchard seemed to be going to
sleep where he stood against the wall.

The inspector came back with Irma. She wore the frightened,
half-defensive, half-defiant air which people of her class wear when
confronted by the authorities. Her big, cow's eyes rolled uneasily.

"Oh, Irma--" Germaine began.

M. Formery cut her short, somewhat brusquely. "Excuse me, excuse me. I
am conducting this inquiry," he said. And then, turning to Irma, he
added, "Now, don't be frightened, Mademoiselle Irma; I want to ask you
a question or two. Have you brought up to Paris the pendant which the
Duke of Charmerace gave your mistress yesterday?"

"Me, sir? No, sir. I haven't brought the pendant," said Irma.

"You're quite sure?" said M. Formery.

"Yes, sir; I haven't seen the pendant. Didn't Mademoiselle Germaine
leave it on the bureau?" said Irma.

"How do you know that?" said M. Formery.

"I heard Mademoiselle Germaine say that it had been on the bureau. I
thought that perhaps Mademoiselle Kritchnoff had put it in her bag."

"Why should Mademoiselle Kritchnoff put it in her bag?" said the Duke
quickly.

"To bring it up to Paris for Mademoiselle Germaine," said Irma.

"But what made you think that?" said Guerchard, suddenly intervening.

"Oh, I thought Mademoiselle Kritchnoff might have put it in her bag
because I saw her standing by the bureau," said Irma.

"Ah, and the pendant was on the bureau?" said M. Formery.

"Yes, sir," said Irma.

There was a silence. Suddenly the atmosphere of the room seemed to have
become charged with an oppression--a vague menace. Guerchard seemed to
have become wide awake again. Germaine and the Duke looked at one
another uneasily.

"Have you been long in the service of Mademoiselle Gournay-Martin?"
said M. Formery.

"Six months, sir," said Irma.

"Very good, thank you. You can go," said M. Formery. "I may want you
again presently."

Irma went quickly out of the room with an air of relief.

M. Formery scribbled a few words on the paper before him and then said:
"Well, I will proceed to question Mademoiselle Kritchnoff."

"Mademoiselle Kritchnoff is quite above suspicion," said the Duke
quickly.

"Oh, yes, quite," said Germaine.

"How long has Mademoiselle Kritchnoff been in your service,
Mademoiselle?" said Guerchard.

"Let me think," said Germaine, knitting her brow.

"Can't you remember?" said M. Formery.

"Just about three years," said Germaine.

"That's exactly the time at which the thefts began," said M. Formery.

"Yes," said Germaine, reluctantly.

"Ask Mademoiselle Kritchnoff to come here, inspector," said M. Formery.

"Yes, sir," said the inspector.

"I'll go and fetch her--I know where to find her," said the Duke
quickly, moving toward the door.

"Please, please, your Grace," protested Guerchard. "The inspector will
fetch her."

The Duke turned sharply and looked at him: "I beg your pardon, but do
you--" he said.

"Please don't be annoyed, your Grace," Guerchard interrupted. "But M.
Formery agrees with me--it would be quite irregular."

"Yes, yes, your Grace," said M. Formery. "We have our method of
procedure. It is best to adhere to it--much the best. It is the result
of years of experience of the best way of getting the truth."

"Just as you please," said the Duke, shrugging his shoulders.

The inspector came into the room: "Mademoiselle Kritchnoff will be here
in a moment. She was just going out."

"She was going out?" said M. Formery. "You don't mean to say you're
letting members of the household go out?"

"No, sir," said the inspector. "I mean that she was just asking if she
might go out."

M. Formery beckoned the inspector to him, and said to him in a voice
too low for the others to hear:

"Just slip up to her room and search her trunks."

"There is no need to take the trouble," said Guerchard, in the same low
voice, but with sufficient emphasis.

"No, of course not. There's no need to take the trouble," M. Formery
repeated after him.

The door opened, and Sonia came in. She was still wearing her
travelling costume, and she carried her cloak on her arm. She stood
looking round her with an air of some surprise; perhaps there was even
a touch of fear in it. The long journey of the night before did not
seem to have dimmed at all her delicate beauty. The Duke's eyes rested
on her in an inquiring, wondering, even searching gaze. She looked at
him, and her own eyes fell.

"Will you come a little nearer, Mademoiselle?" said M. Formery. "There
are one or two questions--"

"Will you allow me?" said Guerchard, in a tone of such deference that
it left M. Formery no grounds for refusal.

M. Formery flushed and ground his teeth. "Have it your own way!" he
said ungraciously.

"Mademoiselle Kritchnoff," said Guerchard, in a tone of the most
good-natured courtesy, "there is a matter on which M. Formery needs
some information. The pendant which the Duke of Charmerace gave
Mademoiselle Gournay-Martin yesterday has been stolen."

"Stolen? Are you sure?" said Sonia in a tone of mingled surprise and
anxiety.

"Quite sure," said Guerchard. "We have exactly determined the
conditions under which the theft was committed. But we have every
reason to believe that the culprit, to avoid detection, has hidden the
pendant in the travelling-bag or trunk of somebody else in order to--"

"My bag is upstairs in my bedroom, sir," Sonia interrupted quickly.
"Here is the key of it."

In order to free her hands to take the key from her wrist-bag, she set
her cloak on the back of a couch. It slipped off it, and fell to the
ground at the feet of the Duke, who had not returned to his place
beside Germaine. While she was groping in her bag for the key, and all
eyes were on her, the Duke, who had watched her with a curious
intentness ever since her entry into the room, stooped quietly down and
picked up the cloak. His hand slipped into the pocket of it; his
fingers touched a hard object wrapped in tissue-paper. They closed
round it, drew it from the pocket, and, sheltered by the cloak,
transferred it to his own. He set the cloak on the back of the sofa,
and very softly moved back to his place by Germaine's side. No one in
the room observed the movement, not even Guerchard: he was watching
Sonia too intently.

Sonia found the key, and held it out to Guerchard.

He shook his head and said: "There is no reason to search your
bag--none whatever. Have you any other luggage?"

She shrank back a little from his piercing eyes, almost as if their
gaze scared her.

"Yes, my trunk ... it's upstairs in my bedroom too ... open."

She spoke in a faltering voice, and her troubled eyes could not meet
those of the detective.

"You were going out, I think," said Guerchard gently.

"I was asking leave to go out. There is some shopping that must be
done," said Sonia.

"You do not see any reason why Mademoiselle Kritchnoff should not go
out, M. Formery, do you?" said Guerchard.

"Oh, no, none whatever; of course she can go out," said M. Formery.

Sonia turned round to go.

"One moment," said Guerchard, coming forward. "You've only got that
wrist-bag with you?"

"Yes," said Sonia. "I have my money and my handkerchief in it." And she
held it out to him.

Guerchard's keen eyes darted into it; and he muttered, "No point in
looking in that. I don't suppose any one would have had the audacity--"
and he stopped.

Sonia made a couple of steps toward the door, turned, hesitated, came
back to the couch, and picked up her cloak.

There was a sudden gleam in Guerchard's eyes--a gleam of understanding,
expectation, and triumph. He stepped forward, and holding out his
hands, said: "Allow me."

"No, thank you," said Sonia. "I'm not going to put it on."

"No ... but it's possible ... some one may have ... have you felt in
the pockets of it? That one, now? It seems as if that one--"

He pointed to the pocket which had held the packet.

Sonia started back with an air of utter dismay; her eyes glanced wildly
round the room as if seeking an avenue of escape; her fingers closed
convulsively on the pocket.

"But this is abominable!" she cried. "You look as if--"

"I beg you, mademoiselle," interrupted Guerchard. "We are sometimes
obliged--"

"Really, Mademoiselle Sonia," broke in the Duke, in a singularly clear
and piercing tone, "I cannot see why you should object to this mere
formality."

"Oh, but--but--" gasped Sonia, raising her terror-stricken eyes to his.

The Duke seemed to hold them with his own; and he said in the same
clear, piercing voice, "There isn't the slightest reason for you to be
frightened."

Sonia let go of the cloak, and Guerchard, his face all alight with
triumph, plunged his hand into the pocket. He drew it out empty, and
stared at it, while his face fell to an utter, amazed blankness.

"Nothing? nothing?" he muttered under his breath. And he stared at his
empty hand as if he could not believe his eyes.

By a violent effort he forced an apologetic smile on his face, and said
to Sonia: "A thousand apologies, mademoiselle."

He handed the cloak to her. Sonia took it and turned to go. She took a
step towards the door, and tottered.

The Duke sprang forward and caught her as she was falling.

"Do you feel faint?" he said in an anxious voice.

"Thank you, you just saved me in time," muttered Sonia.

"I'm really very sorry," said Guerchard.

"Thank you, it was nothing. I'm all right now," said Sonia, releasing
herself from the Duke's supporting arm.

She drew herself up, and walked quietly out of the room.

Guerchard went back to M. Formery at the writing-table.

"You made a clumsy mistake there, Guerchard," said M. Formery, with a
touch of gratified malice in his tone.

Guerchard took no notice of it: "I want you to give orders that nobody
leaves the house without my permission," he said, in a low voice.

"No one except Mademoiselle Kritchnoff, I suppose," said M. Formery,
smiling.

"She less than any one," said Guerchard quickly.

"I don't understand what you're driving at a bit," said M. Formery.
"Unless you suppose that Mademoiselle Kritchnoff is Lupin in disguise."

Guerchard laughed softly: "You will have your joke, M. Formery," he
said.

"Well, well, I'll give the order," said M. Formery, somewhat mollified
by the tribute to his humour.

He called the inspector to him and whispered a word in his ear. Then he
rose and said: "I think, gentlemen, we ought to go and examine the
bedrooms, and, above all, make sure that the safe in M.
Gournay-Martin's bedroom has not been tampered with."

"I was wondering how much longer we were going to waste time here
talking about that stupid pendant," grumbled the millionaire; and he
rose and led the way.

"There may also be some jewel-cases in the bedrooms," said M. Formery.
"There are all the wedding presents. They were in charge of Victoire."
said Germaine quickly. "It would be dreadful if they had been stolen.
Some of them are from the first families in France."

"They would replace them ... those paper-knives," said the Duke,
smiling.

Germaine and her father led the way. M. Formery, Guerchard, and the
inspector followed them. At the door the Duke paused, stopped, closed
it on them softly. He came back to the window, put his hand in his
pocket, and drew out the packet wrapped in tissue-paper.

He unfolded the paper with slow, reluctant fingers, and revealed the
pendant.




CHAPTER XIII

LUPIN WIRES


The Duke stared at the pendant, his eyes full of wonder and pity.

"Poor little girl!" he said softly under his breath.

He put the pendant carefully away in his waistcoat-pocket and stood
staring thoughtfully out of the window.

The door opened softly, and Sonia came quickly into the room, closed
the door, and leaned back against it. Her face was a dead white; her
skin had lost its lustre of fine porcelain, and she stared at him with
eyes dim with anguish.

In a hoarse, broken voice, she muttered: "Forgive me! Oh, forgive me!"

"A thief--you?" said the Duke, in a tone of pitying wonder.

Sonia groaned.

"You mustn't stop here," said the Duke in an uneasy tone, and he looked
uneasily at the door.

"Ah, you don't want to speak to me any more," said Sonia, in a
heartrending tone, wringing her hands.

"Guerchard is suspicious of everything. It is dangerous for us to be
talking here. I assure you that it's dangerous," said the Duke.

"What an opinion must you have of me! It's dreadful--cruel!" wailed
Sonia.

"For goodness' sake don't speak so loud," said the Duke, with even
greater uneasiness. "You MUST think of Guerchard."

"What do I care?" cried Sonia. "I've lost the liking of the only
creature whose liking I wanted. What does anything else matter? What
DOES it matter?"

"We'll talk somewhere else presently. That'll be far safer," said the
Duke.

"No, no, we must talk now!" cried Sonia. "You must know.... I must tell
... Oh, dear! ... Oh, dear! ... I don't know how to tell you.... And
then it is so unfair.... she ... Germaine ... she has everything," she
panted. "Yesterday, before me, you gave her that pendant, ... she
smiled ... she was proud of it.... I saw her pleasure.... Then I took
it--I took it--I took it! And if I could, I'd take her fortune, too....
I hate her! Oh, how I hate her!"

"What!" said the Duke.

"Yes, I do ... I hate her!" said Sonia; and her eyes, no longer gentle,
glowed with the sombre resentment, the dull rage of the weak who turn
on Fortune. Her gentle voice was harsh with rebellious wrath.

"You hate her?" said the Duke quickly.

"I should never have told you that.... But now I dare.... I dare speak
out.... It's you! ... It's you--" The avowal died on her lips. A
burning flush crimsoned her cheeks and faded as quickly as it came: "I
hate her!" she muttered.

"Sonia--" said the Duke gently.

"Oh! I know that it's no excuse.... I know that you're thinking 'This
is a very pretty story, but it's not her first theft'; ... and it's
true--it's the tenth, ... perhaps it's the twentieth.... It's true--I
am a thief." She paused, and the glow deepened in her eyes. "But
there's one thing you must believe--you shall believe; since you came,
since I've known you, since the first day you set eyes on me, I have
stolen no more ... till yesterday when you gave her the pendant before
me. I could not bear it ... I could not." She paused and looked at him
with eyes that demanded an assent.

"I believe you," said the Duke gravely.

She heaved a deep sigh of relief, and went on more quietly--some of its
golden tone had returned to her voice: "And then, if you knew how it
began ... the horror of it," she said.

"Poor child!" said the Duke softly.

"Yes, you pity me, but you despise me--you despise me beyond words. You
shall not! I will not have it!" she cried fiercely.

"Believe me, no," said the Duke, in a soothing tone.

"Listen," said Sonia. "Have you ever been alone--alone in the world?
... Have you ever been hungry? Think of it ... in this big city where I
was starving in sight of bread ... bread in the shops .... One only had
to stretch out one's hand to touch it ... a penny loaf. Oh, it's
commonplace!" she broke off: "quite commonplace!"

"Go on: tell me," said the Duke curtly.

"There was one way I could make money and I would not do it: no, I
would not," she went on. "But that day I was dying ... understand, I
was dying ....I went to the rooms of a man I knew a little. It was my
last resource. At first I was glad ... he gave me food and wine ... and
then, he talked to me ... he offered me money."

"What!" cried the Duke; and a sudden flame of anger flared up in his
eyes.

"No; I could not ... and then I robbed him.... I preferred to ... it
was more decent. Ah, I had excuses then. I began to steal to remain an
honest woman ... and I've gone on stealing to keep up appearances. You
see ... I joke about it." And she laughed, the faint, dreadful, mocking
laugh of a damned soul. "Oh, dear! Oh, dear!" she cried; and, burying
her face in her hands, she burst into a storm of weeping.

"Poor child," said the Duke softly. And he stared gloomily on the
ground, overcome by this revelation of the tortures of the feeble in
the underworld beneath the Paris he knew.

"Oh, you do pity me ... you do understand ... and feel," said Sonia,
between her sobs.

The Duke raised his head and gazed at her with eyes full of an infinite
sympathy and compassion.

"Poor little Sonia," he said gently. "I understand."

She gazed at him with incredulous eyes, in which joy and despair
mingled, struggling.

He came slowly towards her, and stopped short. His quick ear had caught
the sound of a footstep outside the door.

"Quick! Dry your eyes! You must look composed. The other room!" he
cried, in an imperative tone.

He caught her hand and drew her swiftly into the further drawing-room.

With the quickness which came of long practice in hiding her feelings
Sonia composed her face to something of its usual gentle calm. There
was even a faint tinge of colour in her cheeks; they had lost their
dead whiteness. A faint light shone in her eyes; the anguish had
cleared from them. They rested on the Duke with a look of ineffable
gratitude. She sat down on a couch. The Duke went to the window and
lighted a cigarette. They heard the door of the outer drawing-room
open, and there was a pause. Quick footsteps crossed the room, and
Guerchard stood in the doorway. He looked from one to the other with
keen and eager eyes. Sonia sat staring rather listlessly at the carpet.
The Duke turned, and smiled at him.

"Well, M. Guerchard," he said. "I hope the burglars have not stolen the
coronet."

"The coronet is safe, your Grace," said Guerchard.

"And the paper-knives?" said the Duke.

"The paper-knives?" said Guerchard with an inquiring air.

"The wedding presents," said the Duke.

"Yes, your Grace, the wedding presents are safe," said Guerchard.

"I breathe again," said the Duke languidly.

Guerchard turned to Sonia and said, "I was looking for you,
Mademoiselle, to tell you that M. Formery has changed his mind. It is
impossible for you to go out. No one will be allowed to go out."

"Yes?" said Sonia, in an indifferent tone.

"We should be very much obliged if you would go to your room," said
Guerchard. "Your meals will be sent up to you."

"What?" said Sonia, rising quickly; and she looked from Guerchard to
the Duke. The Duke gave her the faintest nod.

"Very well, I will go to my room," she said coldly.

They accompanied her to the door of the outer drawing-room. Guerchard
opened it for her and closed it after her.

"Really, M. Guerchard," said the Duke, shrugging his shoulders. "This
last measure--a child like that!"

"Really, I'm very sorry, your Grace; but it's my trade, or, if you
prefer it, my duty. As long as things are taking place here which I am
still the only one to perceive, and which are not yet clear to me, I
must neglect no precaution."

"Of course, you know best," said the Duke. "But still, a child like
that--you're frightening her out of her life."

Guerchard shrugged his shoulders, and went quietly out of the room.

The Duke sat down in an easy chair, frowning and thoughtful. Suddenly
there struck on his ears the sound of a loud roaring and heavy bumping
on the stairs, the door flew open, and M. Gournay-Martin stood on the
threshold waving a telegram in his hand.

M. Formery and the inspector came hurrying down the stairs behind him,
and watched his emotion with astonished and wondering eyes.

"Here!" bellowed the millionaire. "A telegram! A telegram from the
scoundrel himself! Listen! Just listen:"

  "A thousand apologies for not having been
   able to keep my promise about the coronet.
   Had an appointment at the Acacias. Please
   have coronet ready in your room to-night. Will
   come without fail to fetch it, between a quarter
   to twelve and twelve o'clock."

  "Yours affectionately,"

  "ARSENE LUPIN."

"There! What do you think of that?"

"If you ask me, I think he's humbug," said the Duke with conviction.

"Humbug! You always think it's humbug! You thought the letter was
humbug; and look what has happened!" cried the millionaire.

"Give me the telegram, please," said M. Formery quickly.

The millionaire gave it to him; and he read it through.

"Find out who brought it, inspector," he said.

The inspector hurried to the top of the staircase and called to the
policeman in charge of the front door. He came back to the drawing-room
and said: "It was brought by an ordinary post-office messenger, sir."

"Where is he?" said M. Formery. "Why did you let him go?"

"Shall I send for him, sir?" said the inspector.

"No, no, it doesn't matter," said M. Formery; and, turning to M.
Gournay-Martin and the Duke, he said, "Now we're really going to have
trouble with Guerchard. He is going to muddle up everything. This
telegram will be the last straw. Nothing will persuade him now that
this is not Lupin's work. And just consider, gentlemen: if Lupin had
come last night, and if he had really set his heart on the coronet, he
would have stolen it then, or at any rate he would have tried to open
the safe in M. Gournay-Martin's bedroom, in which the coronet actually
is, or this safe here"--he went to the safe and rapped on the door of
it--"in which is the second key."

"That's quite clear," said the inspector.

"If, then, he did not make the attempt last night, when he had a clear
field--when the house was empty--he certainly will not make the attempt
now when we are warned, when the police are on the spot, and the house
is surrounded. The idea is childish, gentlemen"--he leaned against the
door of the safe--"absolutely childish, but Guerchard is mad on this
point; and I foresee that his madness is going to hamper us in the most
idiotic way."

He suddenly pitched forward into the middle of the room, as the door of
the safe opened with a jerk, and Guerchard shot out of it.

"What the devil!" cried M. Formery, gaping at him.

"You'd be surprised how clearly you hear everything in these
safes--you'd think they were too thick," said Guerchard, in his gentle,
husky voice.

"How on earth did you get into it?" cried M. Formery.

"Getting in was easy enough. It's the getting out that was awkward.
These jokers had fixed up some kind of a spring so that I nearly shot
out with the door," said Guerchard, rubbing his elbow.

"But how did you get into it? How the deuce DID you get into it?" cried
M. Formery.

"Through the little cabinet into which that door behind the safe opens.
There's no longer any back to the safe; they've cut it clean out of
it--a very neat piece of work. Safes like this should always be fixed
against a wall, not stuck in front of a door. The backs of them are
always the weak point."

"And the key? The key of the safe upstairs, in my bedroom, where the
coronet is--is the key there?" cried M. Gournay-Martin.

Guerchard went back into the empty safe, and groped about in it. He
came out smiling.

"Well, have you found the key?" cried the millionaire.

"No. I haven't; but I've found something better," said Guerchard.

"What is it?" said M. Formery sharply.

"I'll give you a hundred guesses," said Guerchard with a tantalizing
smile.

"What is it?" said M. Formery.

"A little present for you," said Guerchard.

"What do you mean?" cried M. Formery angrily.

Guerchard held up a card between his thumb and forefinger and said
quietly:

"The card of Arsene Lupin."




CHAPTER XIV

GUERCHARD PICKS UP THE TRUE SCENT


The millionaire gazed at the card with stupefied eyes, the inspector
gazed at it with extreme intelligence, the Duke gazed at it with
interest, and M. Formery gazed at it with extreme disgust.

"It's part of the same ruse--it was put there to throw us off the
scent. It proves nothing--absolutely nothing," he said scornfully.

"No; it proves nothing at all," said Guerchard quietly.

"The telegram is the important thing--this telegram," said M.
Gournay-Martin feverishly. "It concerns the coronet. Is it going to be
disregarded?"

"Oh, no, no," said M. Formery in a soothing tone. "It will be taken
into account. It will certainly be taken into account."

M. Gournay-Martin's butler appeared in the doorway of the drawing-room:
"If you please, sir, lunch is served," he said.

At the tidings some of his weight of woe appeared to be lifted from the
head of the millionaire. "Good!" he said, "good! Gentlemen, you will
lunch with me, I hope."

"Thank you," said M. Formery. "There is nothing else for us to do, at
any rate at present, and in the house. I am not quite satisfied about
Mademoiselle Kritchnoff--at least Guerchard is not. I propose to
question her again--about those earlier thefts."

"I'm sure there's nothing in that," said the Duke quickly.

"No, no; I don't think there is," said M. Formery. "But still one never
knows from what quarter light may come in an affair like this. Accident
often gives us our best clues."

"It seems rather a shame to frighten her--she's such a child," said the
Duke.

"Oh, I shall be gentle, your Grace--as gentle as possible, that is. But
I look to get more from the examination of Victoire. She was on the
scene. She has actually seen the rogues at work; but till she recovers
there is nothing more to be done, except to wait the discoveries of the
detectives who are working outside; and they will report here. So in
the meantime we shall be charmed to lunch with you, M. Gournay-Martin."

They went downstairs to the dining-room and found an elaborate and
luxurious lunch, worthy of the hospitality of a millionaire, awaiting
them. The skill of the cook seemed to have been quite unaffected by the
losses of his master. M. Formery, an ardent lover of good things,
enjoyed himself immensely. He was in the highest spirits. Germaine, a
little upset by the night-journey, was rather querulous. Her father was
plunged in a gloom which lifted for but a brief space at the appearance
of a fresh delicacy. Guerchard ate and drank seriously, answering the
questions of the Duke in a somewhat absent-minded fashion. The Duke
himself seemed to have lost his usual flow of good spirits, and at
times his brow was knitted in an anxious frown. His questions to
Guerchard showed a far less keen interest in the affair.

To him the lunch seemed very long and very tedious; but at last it came
to an end. M. Gournay-Martin seemed to have been much cheered by the
wine he had drunk. He was almost hopeful. M. Formery, who had not by
any means trifled with the champagne, was raised to the very height of
sanguine certainty. Their coffee and liqueurs were served in the
smoking-room. Guerchard lighted a cigar, refused a liqueur, drank his
coffee quickly, and slipped out of the room.

The Duke followed him, and in the hall said: "I will continue to watch
you unravel the threads of this mystery, if I may, M. Guerchard."

Good Republican as Guerchard was, he could not help feeling flattered
by the interest of a Duke; and the excellent lunch he had eaten
disposed him to feel the honour even more deeply.

"I shall be charmed," he said. "To tell the truth, I find the company
of your Grace really quite stimulating."

"It must be because I find it all so extremely interesting," said the
Duke.

They went up to the drawing-room and found the red-faced young
policeman seated on a chair by the door eating a lunch, which had been
sent up to him from the millionaire's kitchen, with a very hearty
appetite.

They went into the drawing-room. Guerchard shut the door and turned the
key: "Now," he said, "I think that M. Formery will give me half an hour
to myself. His cigar ought to last him at least half an hour. In that
time I shall know what the burglars really did with their plunder--at
least I shall know for certain how they got it out of the house."

"Please explain," said the Duke. "I thought we knew how they got it out
of the house." And he waved his hand towards the window.

"Oh, that!--that's childish," said Guerchard contemptuously. "Those are
traces for an examining magistrate. The ladder, the table on the
window-sill, they lead nowhere. The only people who came up that ladder
were the two men who brought it from the scaffolding. You can see their
footsteps. Nobody went down it at all. It was mere waste of time to
bother with those traces."

"But the footprint under the book?" said the Duke.

"Oh, that," said Guerchard. "One of the burglars sat on the couch
there, rubbed plaster on the sole of his boot, and set his foot down on
the carpet. Then he dusted the rest of the plaster off his boot and put
the book on the top of the footprint."

"Now, how do you know that?" said the astonished Duke.

"It's as plain as a pike-staff," said Guerchard. "There must have been
several burglars to move such pieces of furniture. If the soles of all
of them had been covered with plaster, all the sweeping in the world
would not have cleared the carpet of the tiny fragments of it. I've
been over the carpet between the footprint and the window with a
magnifying glass. There are no fragments of plaster on it. We dismiss
the footprint. It is a mere blind, and a very fair blind too--for an
examining magistrate."

"I understand," said the Duke.

"That narrows the problem, the quite simple problem, how was the
furniture taken out of the room. It did not go through that window down
the ladder. Again, it was not taken down the stairs, and out of the
front door, or the back. If it had been, the concierge and his wife
would have heard the noise. Besides that, it would have been carried
down into a main street, in which there are people at all hours.
Somebody would have been sure to tell a policeman that this house was
being emptied. Moreover, the police were continually patrolling the
main streets, and, quickly as a man like Lupin would do the job, he
could not do it so quickly that a policeman would not have seen it. No;
the furniture was not taken down the stairs or out of the front door.
That narrows the problem still more. In fact, there is only one mode of
egress left."

"The chimney!" cried the Duke.

"You've hit it," said Guerchard, with a husky laugh. "By that
well-known logical process, the process of elimination, we've excluded
all methods of egress except the chimney."

He paused, frowning, in some perplexity; and then he said uneasily:
"What I don't like about it is that Victoire was set in the fireplace.
I asked myself at once what was she doing there. It was unnecessary
that she should be drugged and set in the fireplace--quite unnecessary."

"It might have been to put off an examining magistrate," said the Duke.
"Having found Victoire in the fireplace, M. Formery did not look for
anything else."

"Yes, it might have been that," said Guerchard slowly. "On the other
hand, she might have been put there to make sure that I did not miss
the road the burglars took. That's the worst of having to do with
Lupin. He knows me to the bottom of my mind. He has something up his
sleeve--some surprise for me. Even now, I'm nowhere near the bottom of
the mystery. But come along, we'll take the road the burglars took. The
inspector has put my lantern ready for me."

As he spoke he went to the fireplace, picked up a lantern which had
been set on the top of the iron fire-basket, and lighted it. The Duke
stepped into the great fireplace beside him. It was four feet deep, and
between eight and nine feet broad. Guerchard threw the light from the
lantern on to the back wall of it. Six feet from the floor the soot
from the fire stopped abruptly, and there was a dappled patch of
bricks, half of them clean and red, half of them blackened by soot,
five feet broad, and four feet high.

"The opening is higher up than I thought," said Guerchard. "I must get
a pair of steps."

He went to the door of the drawing-room and bade the young policeman
fetch him a pair of steps. They were brought quickly. He took them from
the policeman, shut the door, and locked it again. He set the steps in
the fireplace and mounted them.

"Be careful," he said to the Duke, who had followed him into the
fireplace, and stood at the foot of the steps. "Some of these bricks
may drop inside, and they'll sting you up if they fall on your toes."

The Duke stepped back out of reach of any bricks that might fall.

Guerchard set his left hand against the wall of the chimney-piece
between him and the drawing-room, and pressed hard with his right
against the top of the dappled patch of bricks. At the first push, half
a dozen of them fell with a bang on to the floor of the next house. The
light came flooding in through the hole, and shone on Guerchard's face
and its smile of satisfaction. Quickly he pushed row after row of
bricks into the next house until he had cleared an opening four feet
square.

"Come along," he said to the Duke, and disappeared feet foremost
through the opening.

The Duke mounted the steps, and found himself looking into a large
empty room of the exact size and shape of the drawing-room of M.
Gournay-Martin, save that it had an ordinary modern fireplace instead
of one of the antique pattern of that in which he stood. Its
chimney-piece was a few inches below the opening. He stepped out on to
the chimney-piece and dropped lightly to the floor.

"Well," he said, looking back at the opening through which he had come.
"That's an ingenious dodge."

"Oh, it's common enough," said Guerchard. "Robberies at the big
jewellers' are sometimes worked by these means. But what is uncommon
about it, and what at first sight put me off the track, is that these
burglars had the cheek to pierce the wall with an opening large enough
to enable them to remove the furniture of a house."

"It's true," said the Duke. "The opening's as large as a good-sized
window. Those burglars seem capable of everything--even of a
first-class piece of mason's work."

"Oh, this has all been prepared a long while ago. But now I'm really on
their track. And after all, I haven't really lost any time. Dieusy
wasted no time in making inquiries in Sureau Street; he's been working
all this side of the house."

Guerchard drew up the blinds, opened the shutters, and let the daylight
flood the dim room. He came back to the fireplace and looked down at
the heap of bricks, frowning:

"I made a mistake there," he said. "I ought to have taken those bricks
down carefully, one by one."

Quickly he took brick after brick from the pile, and began to range
them neatly against the wall on the left. The Duke watched him for two
or three minutes, then began to help him. It did not take them long,
and under one of the last few bricks Guerchard found a fragment of a
gilded picture-frame.

"Here's where they ought to have done their sweeping," he said, holding
it up to the Duke.

"I tell you what," said the Duke, "I shouldn't wonder if we found the
furniture in this house still."

"Oh, no, no!" said Guerchard. "I tell you that Lupin would allow for
myself or Ganimard being put in charge of the case; and he would know
that we should find the opening in the chimney. The furniture was taken
straight out into the side-street on to which this house opens." He led
the way out of the room on to the landing and went down the dark
staircase into the hall. He opened the shutters of the hall windows,
and let in the light. Then he examined the hall. The dust lay thick on
the tiled floor. Down the middle of it was a lane formed by many feet.
The footprints were faint, but still plain in the layer of dust.
Guerchard came back to the stairs and began to examine them. Half-way
up the flight he stooped, and picked up a little spray of flowers:
"Fresh!" he said. "These have not been long plucked."

"Salvias," said the Duke.

"Salvias they are," said Guerchard. "Pink salvias; and there is only
one gardener in France who has ever succeeded in getting this shade--M.
Gournay-Martin's gardener at Charmerace. I'm a gardener myself."

"Well, then, last night's burglars came from Charmerace. They must
have," said the Duke.

"It looks like it," said Guerchard.

"The Charolais," said the Duke.

"It looks like it," said Guerchard.

"It must be," said the Duke. "This IS interesting--if only we could get
an absolute proof."

"We shall get one presently," said Guerchard confidently.

"It is interesting," said the Duke in a tone of lively enthusiasm.
"These clues--these tracks which cross one another--each fact by
degrees falling into its proper place--extraordinarily interesting." He
paused and took out his cigarette-case: "Will you have a cigarette?" he
said.

"Are they caporal?" said Guerchard.

"No, Egyptians--Mercedes."

"Thank you," said Guerchard; and he took one.

The Duke struck a match, lighted Guerchard's cigarette, and then his
own:

"Yes, it's very interesting," he said. "In the last quarter of an hour
you've practically discovered that the burglars came from
Charmerace--that they were the Charolais--that they came in by the
front door of this house, and carried the furniture out of it."

"I don't know about their coming in by it," said Guerchard. "Unless I'm
very much mistaken, they came in by the front door of M.
Gournay-Martin's house."

"Of course," said the Duke. "I was forgetting. They brought the keys
from Charmerace."

"Yes, but who drew the bolts for them?" said Guerchard. "The concierge
bolted them before he went to bed. He told me so. He was telling the
truth--I know when that kind of man is telling the truth."

"By Jove!" said the Duke softly. "You mean that they had an accomplice?"

"I think we shall find that they had an accomplice. But your Grace is
beginning to draw inferences with uncommon quickness. I believe that
you would make a first-class detective yourself--with practice, of
course--with practice."

"Can I have missed my true career?" said the Duke, smiling. "It's
certainly a very interesting game."

"Well, I'm not going to search this barracks myself," said Guerchard.
"I'll send in a couple of men to do it; but I'll just take a look at
the steps myself."

So saying, he opened the front door and went out and examined the steps
carefully.

"We shall have to go back the way we came," he said, when he had
finished his examination. "The drawing-room door is locked. We ought to
find M. Formery hammering on it." And he smiled as if he found the
thought pleasing.

They went back up the stairs, through the opening, into the
drawing-room of M. Gournay-Martin's house. Sure enough, from the other
side of the locked door came the excited voice of M. Formery, crying:

"Guerchard! Guerchard! What are you doing? Let me in! Why don't you let
me in?"

Guerchard unlocked the door; and in bounced M. Formery, very excited,
very red in the face.

"Hang it all, Guerchard! What on earth have you been doing?" he cried.
"Why didn't you open the door when I knocked?"

"I didn't hear you," said Guerchard. "I wasn't in the room."

"Then where on earth have you been?" cried M. Formery.

Guerchard looked at him with a faint, ironical smile, and said in his
gentle voice, "I was following the real track of the burglars."




CHAPTER XV

THE EXAMINATION OF SONIA


M. Formery gasped: "The real track?" he muttered.

"Let me show you," said Guerchard. And he led him to the fireplace, and
showed him the opening between the two houses.

"I must go into this myself!" cried M. Formery in wild excitement.

Without more ado he began to mount the steps. Guerchard followed him.
The Duke saw their heels disappear up the steps. Then he came out of
the drawing-room and inquired for M. Gournay-Martin. He was told that
the millionaire was up in his bedroom; and he went upstairs, and
knocked at the door of it.

M. Gournay-Martin bade him enter in a very faint voice, and the Duke
found him lying on the bed. He was looking depressed, even exhausted,
the shadow of the blusterous Gournay-Martin of the day before. The rich
rosiness of his cheeks had faded to a moderate rose-pink.

"That telegram," moaned the millionaire. "It was the last straw. It has
overwhelmed me. The coronet is lost."

"What, already?" said the Duke, in a tone of the liveliest surprise.

"No, no; it's still in the safe," said the millionaire. "But it's as
good as lost--before midnight it will be lost. That fiend will get it."

"If it's in this safe now, it won't be lost before midnight," said the
Duke. "But are you sure it's there now?"

"Look for yourself," said the millionaire, taking the key of the safe
from his waistcoat pocket, and handing it to the Duke.

The Duke opened the safe. The morocco case which held the coronet lay
on the middle shell in front of him. He glanced at the millionaire, and
saw that he had closed his eyes in the exhaustion of despair. Whistling
softly, the Duke opened the case, took out the diadem, and examined it
carefully, admiring its admirable workmanship. He put it back in the
case, turned to the millionaire, and said thoughtfully:

"I can never make up my mind, in the case of one of these old diadems,
whether one ought not to take out the stones and have them re-cut. Look
at this emerald now. It's a very fine stone, but this old-fashioned
cutting does not really do it justice."

"Oh, no, no: you should never interfere with an antique, historic piece
of jewellery. Any alteration decreases its value--its value as an
historic relic," cried the millionaire, in a shocked tone.

"I know that," said the Duke, "but the question for me is, whether one
ought not to sacrifice some of its value to increasing its beauty."

"You do have such mad ideas," said the millionaire, in a tone of
peevish exasperation.

"Ah, well, it's a nice question," said the Duke.

He snapped the case briskly, put it back on the shelf, locked the safe,
and handed the key to the millionaire. Then he strolled across the room
and looked down into the street, whistling softly.

"I think--I think--I'll go home and get out of these motoring clothes.
And I should like to have on a pair of boots that were a trifle less
muddy," he said slowly.

M. Gournay-Martin sat up with a jerk and cried, "For Heaven's sake,
don't you go and desert me, my dear chap! You don't know what my nerves
are like!"

"Oh, you've got that sleuth-hound, Guerchard, and the splendid Formery,
and four other detectives, and half a dozen ordinary policemen guarding
you. You can do without my feeble arm. Besides, I shan't be gone more
than half an hour--three-quarters at the outside. I'll bring back my
evening clothes with me, and dress for dinner here. I don't suppose
that anything fresh will happen between now and midnight; but I want to
be on the spot, and hear the information as it comes in fresh. Besides,
there's Guerchard. I positively cling to Guerchard. It's an education,
though perhaps not a liberal education, to go about with him," said the
Duke; and there was a sub-acid irony in his voice.

"Well, if you must, you must," said M. Gournay-Martin grumpily.

"Good-bye for the present, then," said the Duke. And he went out of the
room and down the stairs. He took his motor-cap from the hall-table,
and had his hand on the latch of the door, when the policeman in charge
of it said, "I beg your pardon, sir, but have you M. Guerchard's
permission to leave the house?"

"M. Guerchard's permission?" said the Duke haughtily. "What has M.
Guerchard to do with me? I am the Duke of Charmerace." And he opened
the door.

"It was M. Formery's orders, your Grace," stammered the policeman
doubtfully.

"M. Formery's orders?" said the Duke, standing on the top step. "Call
me a taxi-cab, please."

The concierge, who stood beside the policeman, ran down the steps and
blew his whistle. The policeman gazed uneasily at the Duke, shifting
his weight from one foot to the other; but he said no more.

A taxi-cab came up to the door, the Duke went down the steps, stepped
into it, and drove away.

Three-quarters of an hour later he came back, having changed into
clothes more suited to a Paris drawing-room. He went up to the
drawing-room, and there he found Guerchard, M. Formery, and the
inspector, who had just completed their tour of inspection of the house
next door and had satisfied themselves that the stolen treasures were
not in it. The inspector and his men had searched it thoroughly just to
make sure; but, as Guerchard had foretold, the burglars had not taken
the chance of the failure of the police to discover the opening between
the two houses. M. Formery told the Duke about their tour of inspection
at length. Guerchard went to the telephone and told the exchange to put
him through to Charmerace. He was informed that the trunk line was very
busy and that he might have to wait half an hour.

The Duke inquired if any trace of the burglars, after they had left
with their booty, had yet been found. M. Formery told him that, so far,
the detectives had failed to find a single trace. Guerchard said that
he had three men at work on the search, and that he was hopeful of
getting some news before long.

"The layman is impatient in these matters," said M. Formery, with an
indulgent smile. "But we have learnt to be patient, after long
experience."

He proceeded to discuss with Guerchard the new theories with which the
discovery of the afternoon had filled his mind. None of them struck the
Duke as being of great value, and he listened to them with a somewhat
absent-minded air. The coming examination of Sonia weighed heavily on
his spirit. Guerchard answered only in monosyllables to the questions
and suggestions thrown out by M. Formery. It seemed to the Duke that he
paid very little attention to him, that his mind was still working hard
on the solution of the mystery, seeking the missing facts which would
bring him to the bottom of it. In the middle of one of M. Formery's
more elaborate dissertations the telephone bell rang.

Guerchard rose hastily and went to it. They heard him say: "Is that
Charmerace? ... I want the gardener.... Out? When will he be back? ...
Tell him to ring me up at M. Gournay-Martin's house in Paris the moment
he gets back.... Detective-Inspector Guerchard ... Guerchard ...
Detective-Inspector."

He turned to them with a frown, and said, "Of course, since I want him,
the confounded gardener has gone out for the day. Still, it's of very
little importance--a mere corroboration I wanted." And he went back to
his seat and lighted another cigarette.

M. Formery continued his dissertation. Presently Guerchard said, "You
might go and see how Victoire is, inspector--whether she shows any
signs of waking. What did the doctor say?"

"The doctor said that she would not really be sensible and have her
full wits about her much before ten o'clock to-night," said the
inspector; but he went to examine her present condition.

M. Formery proceeded to discuss the effects of different anesthetics.
The others heard him with very little attention.

The inspector came back and reported that Victoire showed no signs of
awaking.

"Well, then, M. Formery, I think we might get on with the examination
of Mademoiselle Kritchnoff," said Guerchard. "Will you go and fetch
her, inspector?"

"Really, I cannot conceive why you should worry that poor child," the
Duke protested, in a tone of some indignation.

"It seems to me hardly necessary," said M. Formery.

"Excuse me," said Guerchard suavely, "but I attach considerable
importance to it. It seems to me to be our bounden duty to question her
fully. One never knows from what quarter light may come."

"Oh, well, since you make such a point of it," said M. Formery.
"Inspector, ask Mademoiselle Kritchnoff to come here. Fetch her."

The inspector left the room.

Guerchard looked at the Duke with a faint air of uneasiness: "I think
that we had better question Mademoiselle Kritchnoff by ourselves," he
said.

M. Formery looked at him and hesitated. Then he said: "Oh, yes, of
course, by ourselves."

"Certainly," said the Duke, a trifle haughtily. And he rose and opened
the door. He was just going through it when Guerchard said sharply:

"Your Grace--"

The Duke paid no attention to him. He shut the door quickly behind him
and sprang swiftly up the stairs. He met the inspector coming down with
Sonia. Barring their way for a moment he said, in his kindliest voice:
"Now you mustn't be frightened, Mademoiselle Sonia. All you have to do
is to try to remember as clearly as you can the circumstances of the
earlier thefts at Charmerace. You mustn't let them confuse you."

"Thank you, your Grace, I will try and be as clear as I can," said
Sonia; and she gave him an eloquent glance, full of gratitude for the
warning; and went down the stairs with firm steps.

The Duke went on up the stairs, and knocked softly at the door of M.
Gournay-Martin's bedroom. There was no answer to his knock, and he
quietly opened the door and looked in. Overcome by his misfortunes, the
millionaire had sunk into a profound sleep and was snoring softly. The
Duke stepped inside the room, left the door open a couple of inches,
drew a chair to it, and sat down watching the staircase through the
opening of the door.

He sat frowning, with a look of profound pity on his face. Once the
suspense grew too much for him. He rose and walked up and down the
room. His well-bred calm seemed to have deserted him. He muttered
curses on Guerchard, M. Formery, and the whole French criminal system,
very softly, under his breath. His face was distorted to a mask of
fury; and once he wiped the little beads of sweat from his forehead
with his handkerchief. Then he recovered himself, sat down in the
chair, and resumed his watch on the stairs.

At last, at the end of half an hour, which had seemed to him months
long, he heard voices. The drawing-room door shut, and there were
footsteps on the stairs. The inspector and Sonia came into view.

He waited till they were at the top of the stairs: then he came out of
the room, with his most careless air, and said: "Well, Mademoiselle
Sonia, I hope you did not find it so very dreadful, after all."

She was very pale, and there were undried tears on her cheeks. "It was
horrible," she said faintly. "Horrible. M. Formery was all right--he
believed me; but that horrible detective would not believe a word I
said. He confused me. I hardly knew what I was saying."

The Duke ground his teeth softly. "Never mind, it's over now. You had
better lie down and rest. I will tell one of the servants to bring you
up a glass of wine."

He walked with her to the door of her room, and said: "Try to
sleep--sleep away the unpleasant memory."

She went into her room, and the Duke went downstairs and told the
butler to take a glass of champagne up to her. Then he went upstairs to
the drawing-room. M. Formery was at the table writing. Guerchard stood
beside him. He handed what he had written to Guerchard, and, with a
smile of satisfaction, Guerchard folded the paper and put it in his
pocket.

"Well, M. Formery, did Mademoiselle Kritchnoff throw any fresh light on
this mystery?" said the Duke, in a tone of faint contempt.

"No--in fact she convinced ME that she knew nothing whatever about it.
M. Guerchard seems to entertain a different opinion. But I think that
even he is convinced that Mademoiselle Kritchnoff is not a friend of
Arsene Lupin."

"Oh, well, perhaps she isn't. But there's no telling," said Guerchard
slowly.

"Arsene Lupin?" cried the Duke. "Surely you never thought that
Mademoiselle Kritchnoff had anything to do with Arsene Lupin?"

"I never thought so," said M. Formery. "But when one has a fixed idea
... well, one has a fixed idea." He shrugged his shoulders, and looked
at Guerchard with contemptuous eyes.

The Duke laughed, an unaffected ringing laugh, but not a pleasant one:
"It's absurd!" he cried.

"There are always those thefts," said Guerchard, with a nettled air.

"You have nothing to go upon," said M. Formery. "What if she did enter
the service of Mademoiselle Gournay-Martin just before the thefts
began? Besides, after this lapse of time, if she had committed the
thefts, you'd find it a job to bring them home to her. It's not a job
worth your doing, anyhow--it's a job for an ordinary detective,
Guerchard."

"There's always the pendant," said Guerchard. "I am convinced that that
pendant is in the house."

"Oh, that stupid pendant! I wish I'd never given it to Mademoiselle
Gournay-Martin," said the Duke lightly.

"I have a feeling that if I could lay my hand on that pendant--if I
could find who has it, I should have the key to this mystery."

"The devil you would!" said the Duke softly. "That is odd. It is the
oddest thing about this business I've heard yet."

"I have that feeling--I have that feeling," said Guerchard quietly.

The Duke smiled.




CHAPTER XVI

VICTOIRE'S SLIP


They were silent. The Duke walked to the fireplace, stepped into it,
and studied the opening. He came out again and said: "Oh, by the way,
M. Formery, the policeman at the front door wanted to stop me going out
of the house when I went home to change. I take it that M. Guerchard's
prohibition does not apply to me?"

"Of course not--of course not, your Grace," said M. Formery quickly.

"I saw that you had changed your clothes, your Grace," said Guerchard.
"I thought that you had done it here."

"No," said the Duke, "I went home. The policeman protested; but he went
no further, so I did not throw him into the middle of the street."

"Whatever our station, we should respect the law," said M. Formery
solemnly.

"The Republican Law, M. Formery? I am a Royalist," said the Duke,
smiling at him.

M. Formery shook his head sadly.

"I was wondering," said the Duke, "about M. Guerchard's theory that the
burglars were let in the front door of this house by an accomplice.
Why, when they had this beautiful large opening, did they want a front
door, too?"

"I did not know that that was Guerchard's theory?" said M. Formery, a
trifle contemptuously. "Of course they had no need to use the front
door."

"Perhaps they had no need to use the front door," said Guerchard; "but,
after all, the front door was unbolted, and they did not draw the bolts
to put us off the scent. Their false scent was already prepared"--he
waved his hand towards the window--"moreover, you must bear in mind
that that opening might not have been made when they entered the house.
Suppose that, while they were on the other side of the wall, a brick
had fallen on to the hearth, and alarmed the concierge. We don't know
how skilful they are; they might not have cared to risk it. I'm
inclined to think, on the whole, that they did come in through the
front door."

M. Formery sniffed contemptuously.

"Perhaps you're right," said the Duke. "But the accomplice?"

"I think we shall know more about the accomplice when Victoire awakes,"
said Guerchard.

"The family have such confidence in Victoire," said the Duke.

"Perhaps Lupin has, too," said Guerchard grimly.

"Always Lupin!" said M. Formery contemptuously.

There came a knock at the door, and a footman appeared on the
threshold. He informed the Duke that Germaine had returned from her
shopping expedition, and was awaiting him in her boudoir. He went to
her, and tried to persuade her to put in a word for Sonia, and
endeavour to soften Guerchard's rigour.

She refused to do anything of the kind, declaring that, in view of the
value of the stolen property, no stone must be left unturned to recover
it. The police knew what they were doing; they must have a free hand.
The Duke did not press her with any great vigour; he realized the
futility of an appeal to a nature so shallow, so self-centred, and so
lacking in sympathy. He took his revenge by teasing her about the
wedding presents which were still flowing in. Her father's business
friends were still striving to outdo one another in the costliness of
the jewelry they were giving her. The great houses of the Faubourg
Saint-Germain were still refraining firmly from anything that savoured
of extravagance or ostentation. While he was with her the eleventh
paper-knife came--from his mother's friend, the Duchess of Veauleglise.
The Duke was overwhelmed with joy at the sight of it, and his delighted
comments drove Germaine to the last extremity of exasperation. The
result was that she begged him, with petulant asperity, to get out of
her sight.

He complied with her request, almost with alacrity, and returned to M.
Formery and Guerchard. He found them at a standstill, waiting for
reports from the detectives who were hunting outside the house for
information about the movements of the burglars with the stolen booty,
and apparently finding none. The police were also hunting for the
stolen motor-cars, not only in Paris and its environs, but also all
along the road between Paris and Charmerace.

At about five o'clock Guerchard grew tired of the inaction, and went
out himself to assist his subordinates, leaving M. Formery in charge of
the house itself. He promised to be back by half-past seven, to let the
examining magistrate, who had an engagement for the evening, get away.
The Duke spent his time between the drawing-room, where M. Formery
entertained him with anecdotes of his professional skill, and the
boudoir, where Germaine was entertaining envious young friends who came
to see her wedding presents. The friends of Germaine were always a
little ill at ease in the society of the Duke, belonging as they did to
that wealthy middle class which has made France what she is. His
indifference to the doings of the old friends of his family saddened
them; and they were unable to understand his airy and persistent
trifling. It seemed to them a discord in the cosmic tune.

The afternoon wore away, and at half-past seven Guerchard had not
returned. M. Formery waited for him, fuming, for ten minutes, then left
the house in charge of the inspector, and went off to his engagement.
M. Gournay-Martin was entertaining two financiers and their wives, two
of their daughters, and two friends of the Duke, the Baron de Vernan
and the Comte de Vauvineuse, at dinner that night. Thanks to the Duke,
the party was of a liveliness to which the gorgeous dining-room had
been very little used since it had been so fortunate as to become the
property of M. Gournay-Martin.

The millionaire had been looking forward to an evening of luxurious
woe, deploring the loss of his treasures--giving their prices--to his
sympathetic friends. The Duke had other views; and they prevailed.
After dinner the guests went to the smoking-room, since the
drawing-rooms were in possession of Guerchard. Soon after ten the Duke
slipped away from them, and went to the detective. Guerchard's was not
a face at any time full of expression, and all that the Duke saw on it
was a subdued dulness.

"Well, M. Guerchard," he said cheerfully, "what luck? Have any of your
men come across any traces of the passage of the burglars with their
booty?"

"No, your Grace; so far, all the luck has been with the burglars. For
all that any one seems to have seen them, they might have vanished into
the bowels of the earth through the floor of the cellars in the empty
house next door. That means that they were very quick loading whatever
vehicle they used with their plunder. I should think, myself, that they
first carried everything from this house down into the hall of the
house next door; and then, of course, they could be very quick getting
them from hall to their van, or whatever it was. But still, some one
saw that van--saw it drive up to the house, or waiting at the house, or
driving away from it."

"Is M. Formery coming back?" said the Duke.

"Not to-night," said Guerchard. "The affair is in my hands now; and I
have my own men on it--men of some intelligence, or, at any rate, men
who know my ways, and how I want things done."

"It must be a relief," said the Duke.

"Oh, no, I'm used to M. Formery--to all the examining magistrates in
Paris, and in most of the big provincial towns. They do not really
hamper me; and often I get an idea from them; for some of them are men
of real intelligence."

"And others are not: I understand," said the Duke.

The door opened and Bonavent, the detective, came in.

"The housekeeper's awake, M. Guerchard," he said.

"Good, bring her down here," said Guerchard.

"Perhaps you'd like me to go," said the Duke.

"Oh, no," said Guerchard. "If it would interest you to hear me question
her, please stay."

Bonavent left the room. The Duke sat down in an easy chair, and
Guerchard stood before the fireplace.

"M. Formery told me, when you were out this afternoon, that he believed
this housekeeper to be quite innocent," said the Duke idly.

"There is certainly one innocent in this affair," said Guerchard,
grinning.

"Who is that?" said the Duke.

"The examining magistrate," said Guerchard.

The door opened, and Bonavent brought Victoire in. She was a big,
middle-aged woman, with a pleasant, cheerful, ruddy face, black-haired,
with sparkling brown eyes, which did not seem to have been at all
dimmed by her long, drugged sleep. She looked like a well-to-do
farmer's wife, a buxom, good-natured, managing woman.

As soon as she came into the room, she said quickly:

"I wish, Mr. Inspector, your man would have given me time to put on a
decent dress. I must have been sleeping in this one ever since those
rascals tied me up and put that smelly handkerchief over my face. I
never saw such a nasty-looking crew as they were in my life."

"How many were there, Madame Victoire?" said Guerchard.

"Dozens! The house was just swarming with them. I heard the noise; I
came downstairs; and on the landing outside the door here, one of them
jumped on me from behind and nearly choked me--to prevent me from
screaming, I suppose."

"And they were a nasty-looking crew, were they?" said Guerchard. "Did
you see their faces?"

"No, I wish I had! I should know them again if I had; but they were all
masked," said Victoire.

"Sit down, Madame Victoire. There's no need to tire you," said
Guerchard. And she sat down on a chair facing him.

"Let's see, you sleep in one of the top rooms, Madame Victoire. It has
a dormer window, set in the roof, hasn't it?" said Guerchard, in the
same polite, pleasant voice.

"Yes; yes. But what has that got to do with it?" said Victoire.

"Please answer my questions," said Guerchard sharply. "You went to
sleep in your room. Did you hear any noise on the roof?"

"On the roof? How should I hear it on the roof? There wouldn't be any
noise on the roof," said Victoire.

"You heard nothing on the roof?" said Guerchard.

"No; the noise I heard was down here," said Victoire.

"Yes, and you came down to see what was making it. And you were seized
from behind on the landing, and brought in here," said Guerchard.

"Yes, that's right," said Madame Victoire.

"And were you tied up and gagged on the landing, or in here?" said
Guerchard.

"Oh, I was caught on the landing, and pushed in here, and then tied
up," said Victoire.

"I'm sure that wasn't one man's job," said Guerchard, looking at her
vigorous figure with admiring eyes.

"You may be sure of that," said Victoire. "It took four of them; and at
least two of them have some nice bruises on their shins to show for it."

"I'm sure they have. And it serves them jolly well right," said
Guerchard, in a tone of warm approval. "And, I suppose, while those
four were tying you up the others stood round and looked on."

"Oh, no, they were far too busy for that," said Victoire.

"What were they doing?" said Guerchard.

"They were taking the pictures off the walls and carrying them out of
the window down the ladder," said Victoire.

Guerchard's eyes flickered towards the Duke, but the expression of
earnest inquiry on his face never changed.

"Now, tell me, did the man who took a picture from the walls carry it
down the ladder himself, or did he hand it through the window to a man
who was standing on the top of a ladder ready to receive it?" he said.

Victoire paused as if to recall their action; then she said, "Oh, he
got through the window, and carried it down the ladder himself."

"You're sure of that?" said Guerchard.

"Oh, yes, I am quite sure of it--why should I deceive you, Mr.
Inspector?" said Victoire quickly; and the Duke saw the first shadow of
uneasiness on her face.

"Of course not," said Guerchard. "And where were you?"

"Oh, they put me behind the screen."

"No, no, where were you when you came into the room?"

"I was against the door," said Victoire.

"And where was the screen?" said Guerchard. "Was it before the
fireplace?"

"No; it was on one side--the left-hand side," said Victoire.

"Oh, will you show me exactly where it stood?" said Guerchard.

Victoire rose, and, Guerchard aiding her, set the screen on the
left-hand side of the fireplace.

Guerchard stepped back and looked at it.

"Now, this is very important," he said. "I must have the exact position
of the four feet of that screen. Let's see ... some chalk ... of
course.... You do some dressmaking, don't you, Madame Victoire?"

"Oh, yes, I sometimes make a dress for one of the maids in my spare
time," said Victoire.

"Then you've got a piece of chalk on you," said Guerchard.

"Oh, yes," said Victoire, putting her hand to the pocket of her dress.

She paused, took a step backwards, and looked wildly round the room,
while the colour slowly faded in her ruddy cheeks.

"What am I talking about?" she said in an uncertain, shaky voice. "I
haven't any chalk--I--ran out of chalk the day before yesterday."

"I think you have, Madame Victoire. Feel in your pocket and see," said
Guerchard sternly. His voice had lost its suavity; his face its smile:
his eyes had grown dangerous.

"No, no; I have no chalk," cried Victoire.

With a sudden leap Guerchard sprang upon her, caught her in a firm grip
with his right arm, and his left hand plunged into her pocket.

"Let me go! Let me go! You're hurting," she cried.

Guerchard loosed her and stepped back.

"What's this?" he said; and he held up between his thumb and forefinger
a piece of blue chalk.

Victoire drew herself up and faced him gallantly: "Well, what of
it?--it is chalk. Mayn't an honest woman carry chalk in her pockets
without being insulted and pulled about by every policeman she comes
across?" she cried.

"That will be for the examining magistrate to decide," said Guerchard;
and he went to the door and called Bonavent. Bonavent came in, and
Guerchard said: "When the prison van comes, put this woman in it; and
send her down to the station."

"But what have I done?" cried Victoire. "I'm innocent! I declare I'm
innocent. I've done nothing at all. It's not a crime to carry a piece
of chalk in one's pocket."

"Now, that's a matter for the examining magistrate. You can explain it
to him," said Guerchard. "I've got nothing to do with it: so it's no
good making a fuss now. Do go quietly, there's a good woman."

He spoke in a quiet, business-like tone. Victoire looked him in the
eyes, then drew herself up, and went quietly out of the room.




CHAPTER XVII

SONIA'S ESCAPE


"One of M. Formery's innocents," said Guerchard, turning to the Duke.

"The chalk?" said the Duke. "Is it the same chalk?"

"It's blue," said Guerchard, holding it out. "The same as that of the
signatures on the walls. Add that fact to the woman's sudden
realization of what she was doing, and you'll see that they were
written with it."

"It is rather a surprise," said the Duke. "To look at her you would
think that she was the most honest woman in the world."

"Ah, you don't know Lupin, your Grace," said Guerchard. "He can do
anything with women; and they'll do anything for him. And, what's more,
as far as I can see, it doesn't make a scrap of difference whether
they're honest or not. The fair-haired lady I was telling you about was
probably an honest woman; Ganimard is sure of it. We should have found
out long ago who she was if she had been a wrong 'un. And Ganimard also
swears that when he arrested Lupin on board the Provence some woman,
some ordinary, honest woman among the passengers, carried away Lady
Garland's jewels, which he had stolen and was bringing to America, and
along with them a matter of eight hundred pounds which he had stolen
from a fellow-passenger on the voyage."

"That power of fascination which some men exercise on women is one of
those mysteries which science should investigate before it does
anything else," said the Duke, in a reflective tone. "Now I come to
think of it, I had much better have spent my time on that investigation
than on that tedious journey to the South Pole. All the same, I'm
deucedly sorry for that woman, Victoire. She looks such a good soul."

Guerchard shrugged his shoulders: "The prisons are full of good souls,"
he said, with cynical wisdom born of experience. "They get caught so
much more often than the bad."

"It seems rather mean of Lupin to make use of women like this, and get
them into trouble," said the Duke.

"But he doesn't," said Guerchard quickly. "At least he hasn't up to
now. This Victoire is the first we've caught. I look on it as a good
omen."

He walked across the room, picked up his cloak, and took a card-case
from the inner pocket of it. "If you don't mind, your Grace, I want you
to show this permit to my men who are keeping the door, whenever you go
out of the house. It's just a formality; but I attach considerable
importance to it, for I really ought not to make exceptions in favour
of any one. I have two men at the door, and they have orders to let
nobody out without my written permission. Of course M. Gournay-Martin's
guests are different. Bonavent has orders to pass them out. And, if
your Grace doesn't mind, it will help me. If you carry a permit, no one
else will dream of complaining of having to do so."

"Oh, I don't mind, if it's of any help to you," said the Duke
cheerfully.

"Thank you," said Guerchard. And he wrote on his card and handed it to
the Duke.

The Duke took it and looked at it. On it was written:

     "Pass the Duke of Charmerace."

     "J. GUERCHARD."

"It's quite military," said the Duke, putting the card into his
waistcoat pocket.

There came a knock at the door, and a tall, thin, bearded man came into
the room.

"Ah, Dieusy! At last! What news?" cried Guerchard.

Dieusy saluted: "I've learnt that a motor-van was waiting outside the
next house--in the side street," he said.

"At what time?" said Guerchard.

"Between four and five in the morning," said Dieusy.

"Who saw it?" said Guerchard.

"A scavenger. He thinks that it was nearly five o'clock when the van
drove off."

"Between four and five--nearly five. Then they filled up the opening
before they loaded the van. I thought they would," said Guerchard,
thoughtfully. "Anything else?"

"A few minutes after the van had gone a man in motoring dress came out
of the house," said Dieusy.

"In motoring dress?" said Guerchard quickly.

"Yes. And a little way from the house he threw away his cigarette. The
scavenger thought the whole business a little queer, and he picked up
the cigarette and kept it. Here it is."

He handed it to Guerchard, whose eyes scanned it carelessly and then
glued themselves to it.

"A gold-tipped cigarette ... marked Mercedes ... Why, your Grace, this
is one of your cigarettes!"

"But this is incredible!" cried the Duke.

"Not at all," said Guerchard. "It's merely another link in the chain.
I've no doubt you have some of these cigarettes at Charmerace."

"Oh, yes, I've had a box on most of the tables," said the Duke.

"Well, there you are," said Guerchard.

"Oh, I see what you're driving at," said the Duke. "You mean that one
of the Charolais must have taken a box."

"Well, we know that they'd hardly stick at a box of cigarettes," said
Guerchard.

"Yes ... but I thought ..." said the Duke; and he paused.

"You thought what?" said Guerchard.

"Then Lupin ... since it was Lupin who managed the business last
night--since you found those salvias in the house next door ... then
Lupin came from Charmerace."

"Evidently," said Guerchard.

"And Lupin is one of the Charolais."

"Oh, that's another matter," said Guerchard.

"But it's certain, absolutely certain," said the Duke. "We have the
connecting links ... the salvias ... this cigarette."

"It looks very like it. You're pretty quick on a scent, I must say,"
said Guerchard. "What a detective you would have made! Only ... nothing
is certain."

"But it IS. Whatever more do you want? Was he at Charmerace yesterday,
or was he not? Did he, or did he not, arrange the theft of the
motor-cars?"

"Certainly he did. But he himself might have remained in the background
all the while," said Guerchard.

"In what shape? ... Under what mask? ... By Jove, I should like to see
this fellow!" said the Duke.

"We shall see him to-night," said Guerchard.

"To-night?" said the Duke.

"Of course we shall; for he will come to steal the coronet between a
quarter to twelve and midnight," said Guerchard.

"Never!" said the Duke. "You don't really believe that he'll have the
cheek to attempt such a mad act?"

"Ah, you don't know this man, your Grace ... his extraordinary mixture
of coolness and audacity. It's the danger that attracts him. He throws
himself into the fire, and he doesn't get burnt. For the last ten years
I've been saying to myself, 'Here we are: this time I've got him! ...
At last I'm going to nab him.' But I've said that day after day," said
Guerchard; and he paused.

"Well?" said the Duke.

"Well, the days pass; and I never nab him. Oh, he is thick, I tell
you.... He's a joker, he is ... a regular artist"--he ground his
teeth--"The damned thief!"

The Duke looked at him, and said slowly, "Then you think that to-night
Lupin--"

"You've followed the scent with me, your Grace," Guerchard interrupted
quickly and vehemently. "We've picked up each clue together. You've
almost seen this man at work.... You've understood him. Isn't a man
like this, I ask you, capable of anything?"

"He is," said the Duke, with conviction.

"Well, then," said Guerchard.

"Perhaps you're right," said the Duke.

Guerchard turned to Dieusy and said, in a quieter voice, "And when the
scavenger had picked up the cigarette, did he follow the motorist?"

"Yes, he followed him for about a hundred yards. He went down into
Sureau Street, and turned westwards. Then a motor-car came along; he
got into it, and went off."

"What kind of a motor-car?" said Guerchard.

"A big car, and dark red in colour," said Dieusy.

"The Limousine!" cried the Duke.

"That's all I've got so far, sir," said Dieusy.

"Well, off you go," said Guerchard. "Now that you've got started,
you'll probably get something else before very long."

Dieusy saluted and went.

"Things are beginning to move," said Guerchard cheerfully. "First
Victoire, and now this motor-van."

"They are indeed," said the Duke.

"After all, it ought not to be very difficult to trace that motor-van,"
said Guerchard, in a musing tone. "At any rate, its movements ought to
be easy enough to follow up till about six. Then, of course, there
would be a good many others about, delivering goods."

"You seem to have all the possible information you can want at your
finger-ends," said the Duke, in an admiring tone.

"I suppose I know the life of Paris as well as anybody," said Guerchard.

They were silent for a while. Then Germaine's maid, Irma, came into the
room and said:

"If you please, your Grace, Mademoiselle Kritchnoff would like to speak
to you for a moment."

"Oh? Where is she?" said the Duke.

"She's in her room, your Grace."

"Oh, very well, I'll go up to her," said the Duke. "I can speak to her
in the library."

He rose and was going towards the door when Guerchard stepped forward,
barring his way, and said, "No, your Grace."

"No? Why?" said the Duke haughtily.

"I beg you will wait a minute or two till I've had a word with you,"
said Guerchard; and he drew a folded sheet of paper from his pocket and
held it up.

The Duke looked at Guerchard's face, and he looked at the paper in his
hand; then he said: "Oh, very well." And, turning to Irma, he added
quietly, "Tell Mademoiselle Kritchnoff that I'm in the drawing-room."

"Yes, your Grace, in the drawing-room," said Irma; and she turned to go.

"Yes; and say that I shall be engaged for the next five minutes--the
next five minutes, do you understand?" said the Duke.

"Yes, your Grace," said Irma; and she went out of the door.

"Ask Mademoiselle Kritchnoff to put on her hat and cloak," said
Guerchard.

"Yes, sir," said Irma; and she went.

The Duke turned sharply on Guerchard, and said: "Now, why on earth? ...
I don't understand."

"I got this from M. Formery," said Guerchard, holding up the paper.

"Well," said the Duke. "What is it?"

"It's a warrant, your Grace," said Guerchard.

"What! ... A warrant! ... Not for the arrest of Mademoiselle
Kritchnoff?"

"Yes," said Guerchard.

"Oh, come, it's impossible," said the Duke. "You're never going to
arrest that child?"

"I am, indeed," said Guerchard. "Her examination this afternoon was in
the highest degree unsatisfactory. Her answers were embarrassed,
contradictory, and in every way suspicious."

"And you've made up your mind to arrest her?" said the Duke slowly,
knitting his brow in anxious thought.

"I have, indeed," said Guerchard. "And I'm going to do it now. The
prison van ought to be waiting at the door." He looked at his watch.
"She and Victoire can go together."

"So ... you're going to arrest her ... you're going to arrest her?"
said the Duke thoughtfully: and he took a step or two up and down the
room, still thinking hard.

"Well, you understand the position, don't you, your Grace?" said
Guerchard, in a tone of apology. "Believe me that, personally, I've no
animosity against Mademoiselle Kritchnoff. In fact, the child attracts
me."

"Yes," said the Duke softly, in a musing tone. "She has the air of a
child who has lost its way ... lost its way in life.... And that poor
little hiding-place she found ... that rolled-up handkerchief ...
thrown down in the corner of the little room in the house next door ...
it was absolutely absurd."

"What! A handkerchief!" cried Guerchard, with an air of sudden, utter
surprise.

"The child's clumsiness is positively pitiful," said the Duke.

"What was in the handkerchief? ... The pearls of the pendant?" cried
Guerchard.

"Yes: I supposed you knew all about it. Of course M. Formery left word
for you," said the Duke, with an air of surprise at the ignorance of
the detective.

"No: I've heard nothing about it," cried Guerchard.

"He didn't leave word for you?" said the Duke, in a tone of greater
surprise. "Oh, well, I dare say that he thought to-morrow would do. Of
course you were out of the house when he found it. She must have
slipped out of her room soon after you went."

"He found a handkerchief belonging to Mademoiselle Kritchnoff. Where is
it?" cried Guerchard.

"M. Formery took the pearls, but he left the handkerchief. I suppose
it's in the corner where he found it," said the Duke.

"He left the handkerchief?" cried Guerchard. "If that isn't just like
the fool! He ought to keep hens; it's all he's fit for!"

He ran to the fireplace, seized the lantern, and began lighting it:
"Where is the handkerchief?" he cried.

"In the left-hand corner of the little room on the right on the second
floor. But if you're going to arrest Mademoiselle Kritchnoff, why are
you bothering about the handkerchief? It can't be of any importance,"
said the Duke.

"I beg your pardon," said Guerchard. "But it is."

"But why?" said the Duke.

"I was arresting Mademoiselle Kritchnoff all right because I had a very
strong presumption of her guilt. But I hadn't the slightest proof of
it," said Guerchard.

"What?" cried the Duke, in a horrified tone.

"No, you've just given me the proof; and since she was able to hide the
pearls in the house next door, she knew the road which led to it.
Therefore she's an accomplice," said Guerchard, in a triumphant tone.

"What? Do you think that, too?" cried the Duke. "Good Heavens! And it's
me! ... It's my senselessness! ... It's my fault that you've got your
proof!" He spoke in a tone of acute distress.

"It was your duty to give it me," said Guerchard sternly; and he began
to mount the steps.

"Shall I come with you? I know where the handkerchief is," said the
Duke quickly.

"No, thank you, your Grace," said Guerchard. "I prefer to go alone."

"You'd better let me help you," said the Duke.

"No, your Grace," said Guerchard firmly.

"I must really insist," said the Duke.

"No--no--no," said Guerchard vehemently, with stern decision. "It's no
use your insisting, your Grace; I prefer to go alone. I shall only be
gone a minute or two."

"Just as you like," said the Duke stiffly.

The legs of Guerchard disappeared up the steps. The Duke stood
listening with all his ears. Directly he heard the sound of Guerchard's
heels on the floor, when he dropped from the chimney-piece of the next
room, he went swiftly to the door, opened it, and went out. Bonavent
was sitting on the chair on which the young policeman had sat during
the afternoon. Sonia, in her hat and cloak, was half-way down the
stairs.

The Duke put his head inside the drawing-room door, and said to the
empty room: "Here is Mademoiselle Kritchnoff, M. Guerchard." He held
open the door, Sonia came down the stairs, and went through it. The
Duke followed her into the drawing-room, and shut the door.

"There's not a moment to lose," he said in a low voice.

"Oh, what is it, your Grace?" said Sonia anxiously.

"Guerchard has a warrant for your arrest."

"Then I'm lost!" cried Sonia, in a panic-stricken voice.

"No, you're not. You must go--at once," said the Duke.

"But how can I go? No one can get out of the house. M. Guerchard won't
let them," cried Sonia, panic-stricken.

"We can get over that," said the Duke.

He ran to Guerchard's cloak, took the card-case from the inner pocket,
went to the writing-table, and sat down. He took from his waist-coat
pocket the permit which Guerchard had given him, and a pencil. Then he
took a card from the card-case, set the permit on the table before him,
and began to imitate Guerchard's handwriting with an amazing exactness.
He wrote on the card:

     "Pass Mademoiselle Kritchnoff."
     "J. GUERCHARD."

Sonia stood by his side, panting quickly with fear, and watched him do
it. He had scarcely finished the last stroke, when they heard a noise
on the other side of the opening into the empty house. The Duke looked
at the fireplace, and his teeth bared in an expression of cold
ferocity. He rose with clenched fists, and took a step towards the
fireplace.

"Your Grace? Your Grace?" called the voice of Guerchard.

"What is it?" answered the Duke quietly.

"I can't see any handkerchief," said Guerchard. "Didn't you say it was
in the left-hand corner of the little room on the right?"

"I told you you'd better let me come with you, and find it," said the
Duke, in a tone of triumph. "It's in the right-hand corner of the
little room on the left."

"I could have sworn you said the little room on the right," said
Guerchard.

They heard his footfalls die away.

"Now, you must get out of the house quickly." said the Duke. "Show this
card to the detectives at the door, and they'll pass you without a
word."

He pressed the card into her hand.

"But--but--this card?" stammered Sonia.

"There's no time to lose," said the Duke.

"But this is madness," said Sonia. "When Guerchard finds out about this
card--that you--you--"

"There's no need to bother about that," interrupted the Duke quickly.
"Where are you going to?"

"A little hotel near the Star. I've forgotten the name of it," said
Sonia. "But this card--"

"Has it a telephone?" said the Duke.

"Yes--No. 555, Central," said Sonia.

"If I haven't telephoned to you before half-past eight to-morrow
morning, come straight to my house," said the Duke, scribbling the
telephone number on his shirt-cuff.

"Yes, yes," said Sonia. "But this card.... When Guerchard knows ...
when he discovers.... Oh, I can't let you get into trouble for me."

"I shan't. But go--go," said the Duke, and he slipped his right arm
round her and drew her to the door.

"Oh, how good you are to me," said Sonia softly.

The Duke's other arm went round her; he drew her to him, and their lips
met.

He loosed her, and opened the door, saying loudly: "You're sure you
won't have a cab, Mademoiselle Kritchnoff?"

"No; no, thank you, your Grace. Goodnight," said Sonia. And she went
through the door with a transfigured face.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE DUKE STAYS


The Duke shut the door and leant against it, listening anxiously,
breathing quickly. There came the bang of the front door. With a deep
sigh of relief he left the door, came briskly, smiling, across the
room, and put the card-case back into the pocket of Guerchard's cloak.
He lighted a cigarette, dropped into an easy chair, and sat waiting
with an entirely careless air for the detective's return. Presently he
heard quick footsteps on the bare boards of the empty room beyond the
opening. Then Guerchard came down the steps and out of the fireplace.

His face wore an expression of extreme perplexity:

"I can't understand it," he said. "I found nothing."

"Nothing?" said the Duke.

"No. Are you sure you saw the handkerchief in one of those little rooms
on the second floor--quite sure?" said Guerchard.

"Of course I did," said the Duke. "Isn't it there?"

"No," said Guerchard.

"You can't have looked properly," said the Duke, with a touch of irony
in his voice. "If I were you, I should go back and look again."

"No. If I've looked for a thing, I've looked for it. There's no need
for me to look a second time. But, all the same, it's rather funny.
Doesn't it strike you as being rather funny, your Grace?" said
Guerchard, with a worried air.

"It strikes me as being uncommonly funny," said the Duke, with an
ambiguous smile.

Guerchard looked at him with a sudden uneasiness; then he rang the bell.

Bonavent came into the room.

"Mademoiselle Kritchnoff, Bonavent. It's quite time," said Guerchard.

"Mademoiselle Kritchnoff?" said Bonavent, with an air of surprise.

"Yes, it's time that she was taken to the police-station."

"Mademoiselle Kritchnoff has gone, sir," said Bonavent, in a tone of
quiet remonstrance.

"Gone? What do you mean by gone?" said Guerchard.

"Gone, sir, gone!" said Bonavent patiently.

"But you're mad.... Mad!" cried Guerchard.

"No, I'm not mad," said Bonavent. "Gone! But who let her go?" cried
Guerchard.

"The men at the door," said Bonavent.

"The men at the door," said Guerchard, in a tone of stupefaction. "But
she had to have my permit ... my permit on my card! Send the fools up
to me!"

Bonavent went to the top of the staircase, and called down it.
Guerchard followed him. Two detectives came hurrying up the stairs and
into the drawing-room.

"What the devil do you mean by letting Mademoiselle Kritchnoff leave
the house without my permit, written on my card?" cried Guerchard
violently.

"But she had your permit, sir, and it WAS written on your card,"
stammered one of the detectives.

"It was? ... it was?" said Guerchard. "Then, by Jove, it was a forgery!"

He stood thoughtful for a moment. Then quietly he told his two men to
go back to their post. He did not stir for a minute or two, puzzling it
out, seeking light.

Then he came back slowly into the drawing-room and looked uneasily at
the Duke. The Duke was sitting in his easy chair, smoking a cigarette
with a listless air. Guerchard looked at him, and looked at him, almost
as if he now saw him for the first time.

"Well?" said the Duke, "have you sent that poor child off to prison? If
I'd done a thing like that I don't think I should sleep very well, M.
Guerchard."

"That poor child has just escaped, by means of a forged permit," said
Guerchard very glumly.

"By Jove, I AM glad to hear that!" cried the Duke. "You'll forgive my
lack of sympathy, M. Guerchard; but she was such a child."

"Not too young to be Lupin's accomplice," said Guerchard drily.

"You really think she is?" said the Duke, in a tone of doubt.

"I'm sure of it," said Guerchard, with decision; then he added slowly,
with a perplexed air:

"But how--how--could she get that forged permit?"

The Duke shook his head, and looked as solemn as an owl. Guerchard
looked at him uneasily, went out of the drawing-room, and shut the door.

"How long has Mademoiselle Kritchnoff been gone?" he said to Bonavent.

"Not much more than five minutes," said Bonavent. "She came out from
talking to you in the drawing-room--"

"Talking to me in the drawing-room!" exclaimed Guerchard.

"Yes," said Bonavent. "She came out and went straight down the stairs
and out of the house."

A faint, sighing gasp came from Guerchard's lips. He dashed into the
drawing-room, crossed the room quickly to his cloak, picked it up, took
the card-case out of the pocket, and counted the cards in it. Then he
looked at the Duke.

The Duke smiled at him, a charming smile, almost caressing.

There seemed to be a lump in Guerchard's throat; he swallowed it loudly.

He put the card-case into the breast-pocket of the coat he was wearing.
Then he cried sharply, "Bonavent! Bonavent!"

Bonavent opened the door, and stood in the doorway.

"You sent off Victoire in the prison-van, I suppose," said Guerchard.

"Oh, a long while ago, sir," said Bonavent.

"The van had been waiting at the door since half-past nine."

"Since half-past nine? ... But I told them I shouldn't want it till a
quarter to eleven. I suppose they were making an effort to be in time
for once. Well, it doesn't matter," said Guerchard.

"Then I suppose I'd better send the other prison-van away?" said
Bonavent.

"What other van?" said Guerchard.

"The van which has just arrived," said Bonavent.

"What! What on earth are you talking about?" cried Guerchard, with a
sudden anxiety in his voice and on his face.

"Didn't you order two prison-vans?" said Bonavent.

Guerchard jumped; and his face went purple with fury and dismay. "You
don't mean to tell me that two prison-vans have been here?" he cried.

"Yes, sir," said Bonavent.

"Damnation!" cried Guerchard. "In which of them did you put Victoire?
In which of them?"

"Why, in the first, sir," said Bonavent.

"Did you see the police in charge of it? The coachman?"

"Yes, sir," said Bonavent.

"Did you recognize them?" said Guerchard.

"No," said Bonavent; "they must have been new men. They told me they
came from the Sante."

"You silly fool!" said Guerchard through his teeth. "A fine lot of
sense you've got."

"Why, what's the matter?" said Bonavent.

"We're done, done in the eye!" roared Guerchard. "It's a stroke--a
stroke--"

"Of Lupin's!" interposed the Duke softly.

"But I don't understand," said Bonavent.

"You don't understand, you idiot!" cried Guerchard. "You've sent
Victoire away in a sham prison-van--a prison-van belonging to Lupin.
Oh, that scoundrel! He always has something up his sleeve."

"He certainly shows foresight," said the Duke. "It was very clever of
him to foresee the arrest of Victoire and provide against it."

"Yes, but where is the leakage? Where is the leakage?" cried Guerchard,
fuming. "How did he learn that the doctor said that she would recover
her wits at ten o'clock? Here I've had a guard at the door all day;
I've imprisoned the household; all the provisions have been received
directly by a man of mine; and here he is, ready to pick up Victoire
the very moment she gives herself away! Where is the leakage?"

He turned on Bonavent, and went on: "It's no use your standing there
with your mouth open, looking like a fool. Go upstairs to the servants'
quarters and search Victoire's room again. That fool of an inspector
may have missed something, just as he missed Victoire herself. Get on!
Be smart!"

Bonavent went off briskly. Guerchard paced up and down the room,
scowling.

"Really, I'm beginning to agree with you, M. Guerchard, that this Lupin
is a remarkable man," said the Duke. "That prison-van is
extraordinarily neat."

"I'll prison-van him!" cried Guerchard. "But what fools I have to work
with. If I could get hold of people of ordinary intelligence it would
be impossible to play such a trick as that."

"I don't know about that," said the Duke thoughtfully. "I think it
would have required an uncommon fool to discover that trick."

"What on earth do you mean? Why?" said Guerchard.

"Because it's so wonderfully simple," said the Duke. "And at the same
time it's such infernal cheek."

"There's something in that," said Guerchard grumpily. "But then, I'm
always saying to my men, 'Suspect everything; suspect everybody;
suspect, suspect, suspect.' I tell you, your Grace, that there is only
one motto for the successful detective, and that is that one word,
'suspect.'"

"It can't be a very comfortable business, then," said the Duke. "But I
suppose it has its charms."

"Oh, one gets used to the disagreeable part," said Guerchard.

The telephone bell rang; and he rose and went to it. He put the
receiver to his ear and said, "Yes; it's I--Chief-Inspector Guerchard."

He turned and said to the Duke, "It's the gardener at Charmerace, your
Grace."

"Is it?" said the Duke indifferently.

Guerchard turned to the telephone. "Are you there?" he said. "Can you
hear me clearly? ... I want to know who was in your hot-house yesterday
... who could have gathered some of your pink salvias?"

"I told you that it was I," said the Duke.

"Yes, yes, I know," said Guerchard. And he turned again to the
telephone. "Yes, yesterday," he said. "Nobody else? ... No one but the
Duke of Charmerace? ... Are you sure?... quite sure?... absolutely
sure? ... Yes, that's all I wanted to know ... thank you."

He turned to the Duke and said, "Did you hear that, your Grace? The
gardener says that you were the only person in his hot-houses
yesterday, the only person who could have plucked any pink salvias."

"Does he?" said the Duke carelessly.

Guerchard looked at him, his brow knitted in a faint, pondering frown.
Then the door opened, and Bonavent came in: "I've been through
Victoire's room," he said, "and all I could find that might be of any
use is this--a prayer-book. It was on her dressing-table just as she
left it. The inspector hadn't touched it."

"What about it?" said Guerchard, taking the prayer-book.

"There's a photograph in it," said Bonavent. "It may come in useful
when we circulate her description; for I suppose we shall try to get
hold of Victoire."

Guerchard took the photograph from the prayer-book and looked at it:
"It looks about ten years old," he said. "It's a good deal faded for
reproduction. Hullo! What have we here?"

The photograph showed Victoire in her Sunday best, and with her a boy
of seventeen or eighteen. Guerchard's eyes glued themselves to the face
of the boy. He stared at it, holding the portrait now nearer, now
further off. His eyes kept stealing covertly from the photograph to the
face of the Duke.

The Duke caught one of those covert glances, and a vague uneasiness
flickered in his eyes. Guerchard saw it. He came nearer to the Duke and
looked at him earnestly, as if he couldn't believe his eyes.

"What's the matter?" said the Duke. "What are you looking at so
curiously? Isn't my tie straight?" And he put up his hand and felt it.

"Oh, nothing, nothing," said Guerchard. And he studied the photograph
again with a frowning face.

There was a noise of voices and laughter in the hall.

"Those people are going," said the Duke. "I must go down and say
good-bye to them." And he rose and went out of the room.

Guerchard stood staring, staring at the photograph.

The Duke ran down the stairs, and said goodbye to the millionaire's
guests. After they had gone, M. Gournay-Martin went quickly up the
stairs; Germaine and the Duke followed more slowly.

"My father is going to the Ritz to sleep," said Germaine, "and I'm
going with him. He doesn't like the idea of my sleeping in this house
to-night. I suppose he's afraid that Lupin will make an attack in force
with all his gang. Still, if he did, I think that Guerchard could give
a good account of himself--he's got men enough in the house, at any
rate. Irma tells me it's swarming with them. It would never do for me
to be in the house if there were a fight."

"Oh, come, you don't really believe that Lupin is coming to-night?"
said the Duke, with a sceptical laugh. "The whole thing is sheer
bluff--he has no more intention of coming tonight to steal that coronet
than--than I have."

"Oh, well, there's no harm in being on the safe side," said Germaine.
"Everybody's agreed that he's a very terrible person. I'll just run up
to my room and get a wrap; Irma has my things all packed. She can come
round tomorrow morning to the Ritz and dress me."

She ran up the stairs, and the Duke went into the drawing-room. He
found Guerchard standing where he had left him, still frowning, still
thinking hard.

"The family are off to the Ritz. It's rather a reflection on your
powers of protecting them, isn't it?" said the Duke.

"Oh, well, I expect they'd be happier out of the house," said
Guerchard. He looked at the Duke again with inquiring, searching eyes.

"What's the matter?" said the Duke. "IS my tie crooked?"

"Oh, no, no; it's quite straight, your Grace," said Guerchard, but he
did not take his eyes from the Duke's face.

The door opened, and in came M. Gournay-Martin, holding a bag in his
hand. "It seems to be settled that I'm never to sleep in my own house
again," he said in a grumbling tone.

"There's no reason to go," said the Duke. "Why ARE you going?"

"Danger," said M. Gournay-Martin. "You read Lupin's telegram: 'I shall
come to-night between a quarter to twelve and midnight to take the
coronet.' He knows that it was in my bedroom. Do you think I'm going to
sleep in that room with the chance of that scoundrel turning up and
cutting my throat?"

"Oh, you can have a dozen policemen in the room if you like," said the
Duke. "Can't he, M. Guerchard?"

"Certainly," said Guerchard. "I can answer for it that you will be in
no danger, M. Gournay-Martin."

"Thank you," said the millionaire. "But all the same, outside is good
enough for me."

Germaine came into the room, cloaked and ready to start.

"For once in a way you are ready first, papa," she said. "Are you
coming, Jacques?"

"No; I think I'll stay here, on the chance that Lupin is not bluffing,"
said the Duke. "I don't think, myself, that I'm going to be gladdened
by the sight of him--in fact, I'm ready to bet against it. But you're
all so certain about it that I really must stay on the chance. And,
after all, there's no doubt that he's a man of immense audacity and
ready to take any risk."

"Well, at any rate, if he does come he won't find the diadem," said M.
Gournay-Martin, in a tone of triumph. "I'm taking it with me--I've got
it here." And he held up his bag.

"You are?" said the Duke.

"Yes, I am," said M. Gournay-Martin firmly.

"Do you think it's wise?" said the Duke.

"Why not?" said M. Gournay-Martin.

"If Lupin's really made up his mind to collar that coronet, and if
you're so sure that, in spite of all these safeguards, he's going to
make the attempt, it seems to me that you're taking a considerable
risk. He asked you to have it ready for him in your bedroom. He didn't
say which bedroom."

"Good Lord! I never thought of that!" said M. Gournay-Martin, with an
air of sudden and very lively alarm.

"His Grace is right," said Guerchard. "It would be exactly like Lupin
to send that telegram to drive you out of the house with the coronet to
some place where you would be less protected. That is exactly one of
his tricks."

"Good Heavens!" said the millionaire, pulling out his keys and
unlocking the bag. He opened it, paused hesitatingly, and snapped it to
again.

"Half a minute," he said. "I want a word with you, Duke."

He led the way out of the drawing-room door and the Duke followed him.
He shut the door and said in a whisper:

"In a case like this, I suspect everybody."

"Everybody suspects everybody, apparently," said the Duke. "Are you
sure you don't suspect me?"

"Now, now, this is no time for joking," said the millionaire
impatiently. "What do you think about Guerchard?"

"About Guerchard?" said the Duke. "What do you mean?"

"Do you think I can put full confidence in Guerchard?" said M.
Gournay-Martin.

"Oh, I think so," said the Duke. "Besides, I shall be here to look
after Guerchard. And, though I wouldn't undertake to answer for Lupin,
I think I can answer for Guerchard. If he tries to escape with the
coronet, I will wring his neck for you with pleasure. It would do me
good. And it would do Guerchard good, too."

The millionaire stood reflecting for a minute or two. Then he said,
"Very good; I'll trust him."

Hardly had the door closed behind the millionaire and the Duke, when
Guerchard crossed the room quickly to Germaine and drew from his pocket
the photograph of Victoire and the young man.

"Do you know this photograph of his Grace, mademoiselle?" he said
quickly.

Germaine took the photograph and looked at it.

"It's rather faded," she said.

"Yes; it's about ten years old," said Guerchard.

"I seem to know the face of the woman," said Germaine. "But if it's ten
years old it certainly isn't the photograph of the Duke."

"But it's like him?" said Guerchard.

"Oh, yes, it's like the Duke as he is now--at least, it's a little like
him. But it's not like the Duke as he was ten years ago. He has changed
so," said Germaine.

"Oh, has he?" said Guerchard.

"Yes; there was that exhausting journey of his--and then his illness.
The doctors gave up all hope of him, you know."

"Oh, did they?" said Guerchard.

"Yes; at Montevideo. But his health is quite restored now."

The door opened and the millionaire and the Duke came into the room. M.
Gournay-Martin set his bag upon the table, unlocked it, and with a
solemn air took out the case which held the coronet. He opened it; and
they looked at it.

"Isn't it beautiful?" he said with a sigh.

"Marvellous!" said the Duke.

M. Gournay-Martin closed the case, and said solemnly:

"There is danger, M. Guerchard, so I am going to trust the coronet to
you. You are the defender of my hearth and home--you are the proper
person to guard the coronet. I take it that you have no objection?"

"Not the slightest, M. Gournay-Martin," said Guerchard. "It's exactly
what I wanted you to ask me to do."

M. Gournay-Martin hesitated. Then he handed the coronet to Guerchard,
saying with a frank and noble air, "I have every confidence in you, M.
Guerchard."

"Thank you," said Guerchard.

"Good-night," said M. Gournay-Martin.

"Good-night, M. Guerchard," said Germaine.

"I think, after all, I'll change my mind and go with you. I'm very
short of sleep," said the Duke. "Good-night, M. Guerchard."

"You're never going too, your Grace!" cried Guerchard.

"Why, you don't want me to stay, do you?" said the Duke.

"Yes," said Guerchard slowly.

"I think I would rather go to bed," said the Duke gaily.

"Are you afraid?" said Guerchard, and there was challenge, almost an
insolent challenge, in his tone.

There was a pause. The Duke frowned slightly with a reflective air.
Then he drew himself up; and said a little haughtily:

"You've certainly found the way to make me stay, M. Guerchard."

"Yes, yes; stay, stay," said M. Gournay-Martin hastily. "It's an
excellent idea, excellent. You're the very man to help M. Guerchard,
Duke. You're an intrepid explorer, used to danger and resourceful,
absolutely fearless."

"Do you really mean to say you're not going home to bed, Jacques?" said
Germaine, disregarding her father's wish with her usual frankness.

"No; I'm going to stay with M. Guerchard," said the Duke slowly.

"Well, you will be fresh to go to the Princess's to-morrow night." said
Germaine petulantly. "You didn't get any sleep at all last night, you
couldn't have. You left Charmerace at eight o'clock; you were motoring
all the night, and only got to Paris at six o'clock this morning."

"Motoring all night, from eight o'clock to six!" muttered Guerchard
under his breath.

"Oh, that will be all right," said the Duke carelessly. "This
interesting affair is to be over by midnight, isn't it?"

"Well, I warn you that, tired or fresh, you will have to come with me
to the Princess's to-morrow night. All Paris will be there--all Paris,
that is, who are in Paris."

"Oh, I shall be fresh enough," said the Duke.

They went out of the drawing-room and down the stairs, all four of
them. There was an alert readiness about Guerchard, as if he were ready
to spring. He kept within a foot of the Duke right to the front door.
The detective in charge opened it; and they went down the steps to the
taxi-cab which was awaiting them. The Duke kissed Germaine's fingers
and handed her into the taxi-cab.

M. Gournay-Martin paused at the cab-door, and turned and said, with a
pathetic air, "Am I never to sleep in my own house again?" He got into
the cab and drove off.

The Duke turned and came up the steps, followed by Guerchard. In the
hall he took his opera-hat and coat from the stand, and went upstairs.
Half-way up the flight he paused and said:

"Where shall we wait for Lupin, M. Guerchard? In the drawing-room, or
in M. Gournay-Martin's bedroom?"

"Oh, the drawing-room," said Guerchard. "I think it very unlikely that
Lupin will look for the coronet in M. Gournay-Martin's bedroom. He
would know very well that that is the last place to find it now."

The Duke went on into the drawing-room. At the door Guerchard stopped
and said: "I will just go and post my men, your Grace."

"Very good," said the Duke; and he went into the drawing-room.

He sat down, lighted a cigarette, and yawned. Then he took out his
watch and looked at it.

"Another twenty minutes," he said.




CHAPTER XIX

THE DUKE GOES


When Guerchard joined the Duke in the drawing-room, he had lost his
calm air and was looking more than a little nervous. He moved about the
room uneasily, fingering the bric-a-brac, glancing at the Duke and
looking quickly away from him again. Then he came to a standstill on
the hearth-rug with his back to the fireplace.

"Do you think it's quite safe to stand there, at least with your back
to the hearth? If Lupin dropped through that opening suddenly, he'd
catch you from behind before you could wink twice," said the Duke, in a
tone of remonstrance.

"There would always be your Grace to come to my rescue," said
Guerchard; and there was an ambiguous note in his voice, while his
piercing eyes now rested fixed on the Duke's face. They seemed never to
leave it; they explored, and explored it.

"It's only a suggestion," said the Duke.

"This is rather nervous work, don't you know."

"Yes; and of course you're hardly fit for it," said Guerchard. "If I'd
known about your break-down in your car last night, I should have
hesitated about asking you--"

"A break-down?" interrupted the Duke.

"Yes, you left Charmerace at eight o'clock last night. And you only
reached Paris at six this morning. You couldn't have had a very
high-power car?" said Guerchard.

"I had a 100 h.-p. car," said the Duke.

"Then you must have had a devil of a break-down," said Guerchard.

"Yes, it was pretty bad, but I've known worse," said the Duke
carelessly. "It lost me about three hours: oh, at least three hours.
I'm not a first-class repairer, though I know as much about an engine
as most motorists."

"And there was nobody there to help you repair it?" said Guerchard.

"No; M. Gournay-Martin could not let me have his chauffeur to drive me
to Paris, because he was keeping him to help guard the chateau. And of
course there was nobody on the road, because it was two o'clock in the
morning."

"Yes, there was no one," said Guerchard slowly.

"Not a soul," said the Duke.

"It was unfortunate," said Guerchard; and there was a note of
incredulity in his voice.

"My having to repair the car myself?" said the Duke.

"Yes, of course," said Guerchard, hesitating a little over the assent.

The Duke dropped the end of his cigarette into a tray, and took out his
case. He held it out towards Guerchard, and said, "A cigarette? or
perhaps you prefer your caporal?"

"Yes, I do, but all the same I'll have one," said Guerchard, coming
quickly across the room. And he took a cigarette from the case, and
looked at it.

"All the same, all this is very curious," he said in a new tone, a
challenging, menacing, accusing tone.

"What?" said the Duke, looking at him curiously.

"Everything: your cigarettes ... the salvias ... the photograph that
Bonavent found in Victoire's prayer-book ... that man in motoring dress
... and finally, your break-down," said Guerchard; and the accusation
and the threat rang clearer.

The Duke rose from his chair quickly and said haughtily, in icy tones:
"M. Guerchard, you've been drinking!"

He went to the chair on which he had set his overcoat and his hat, and
picked them up. Guerchard sprang in front of him, barring his way, and
cried in a shaky voice: "No; don't go! You mustn't go!"

"What do you mean?" said the Duke, and paused. "What DO you mean?"

Guerchard stepped back, and ran his hand over his forehead. He was very
pale, and his forehead was clammy to his touch:

"No ... I beg your pardon ... I beg your pardon, your Grace ... I must
be going mad," he stammered.

"It looks very like it," said the Duke coldly.

"What I mean to say is," said Guerchard in a halting, uncertain voice,
"what I mean to say is: help me ... I want you to stay here, to help me
against Lupin, you understand. Will you, your Grace?"

"Yes, certainly; of course I will, if you want me to," said the Duke,
in a more gentle voice. "But you seem awfully upset, and you're
upsetting me too. We shan't have a nerve between us soon, if you don't
pull yourself together."

"Yes, yes, please excuse me," muttered Guerchard.

"Very good," said the Duke. "But what is it we're going to do?"

Guerchard hesitated. He pulled out his handkerchief, and mopped his
forehead: "Well ... the coronet ... is it in this case?" he said in a
shaky voice, and set the case on the table.

"Of course it is," said the Duke impatiently.

Guerchard opened the case, and the coronet sparkled and gleamed
brightly in the electric light: "Yes, it is there; you see it?" said
Guerchard.

"Yes, I see it; well?" said the Duke, looking at him in some
bewilderment, so unlike himself did he seem.

"We're going to wait," said Guerchard.

"What for?" said the Duke.

"Lupin," said Guerchard.

"Lupin? And you actually do believe that, just as in a fairy tale, when
that clock strikes twelve, Lupin will enter and take the coronet?"

"Yes, I do; I do," said Guerchard with stubborn conviction. And he
snapped the case to.

"This is most exciting," said the Duke.

"You're sure it doesn't bore you?" said Guerchard huskily.

"Not a bit of it," said the Duke, with cheerful derision. "To make the
acquaintance of this scoundrel who has fooled you for ten years is as
charming a way of spending the evening as I can think of."

"You say that to me?" said Guerchard with a touch of temper.

"Yes," said the Duke, with a challenging smile. "To you."

He sat down in an easy chair by the table. Guerchard sat down in a
chair on the other side of it, and set his elbows on it. They were
silent.

Suddenly the Duke said, "Somebody's coming."

Guerchard started, and said: "No, I don't hear any one."

Then there came distinctly the sound of a footstep and a knock at the
door.

"You've got keener ears than I," said Guerchard grudgingly. "In all
this business you've shown the qualities of a very promising
detective." He rose, went to the door, and unlocked it.

Bonavent came in: "I've brought you the handcuffs, sir," he said,
holding them out. "Shall I stay with you?"

"No," said Guerchard. "You've two men at the back door, and two at the
front, and a man in every room on the ground-floor?"

"Yes, and I've got three men on every other floor," said Bonavent, in a
tone of satisfaction.

"And the house next door?" said Guerchard.

"There are a dozen men in it," said Bonavent. "No communication between
the two houses is possible any longer."

Guerchard watched the Duke's face with intent eyes. Not a shadow
flickered its careless serenity.

"If any one tries to enter the house, collar him. If need be, fire on
him," said Guerchard firmly. "That is my order; go and tell the others."

"Very good, sir," said Bonavent; and he went out of the room.

"By Jove, we are in a regular fortress," said the Duke.

"It's even more of a fortress than you think, your Grace. I've four men
on that landing," said Guerchard, nodding towards the door.

"Oh, have you?" said the Duke, with a sudden air of annoyance.

"You don't like that?" said Guerchard quickly.

"I should jolly well think not," said the Duke. "With these
precautions, Lupin will never be able to get into this room at all."

"He'll find it a pretty hard job," said Guerchard, smiling. "Unless he
falls from the ceiling, or unless--"

"Unless you're Arsene Lupin," interrupted the Duke.

"In that case, you'd be another, your Grace," said Guerchard.

They both laughed. The Duke rose, yawned, picked up his coat and hat,
and said, "Ah, well, I'm off to bed."

"What?" said Guerchard.

"Well," said the Duke, yawning again, "I was staying to see Lupin. As
there's no longer any chance of seeing him--"

"But there is ... there is ... so stay," cried Guerchard.

"Do you still cling to that notion?" said the Duke wearily.

"We SHALL see him," said Guerchard.

"Nonsense!" said the Duke.

Guerchard lowered his voice and said with an air of the deepest
secrecy: "He's already here, your Grace."

"Lupin? Here?" cried the Duke.

"Yes; Lupin," said Guerchard.

"Where?" cried the astonished Duke.

"He is," said Guerchard.

"As one of your men?" said the Duke eagerly.

"I don't think so," said Guerchard, watching him closely.

"Well, but, well, but--if he's here we've got him.... He is going to
turn up," said the Duke triumphantly; and he set down his hat on the
table beside the coronet.

"I hope so," said Guerchard. "But will he dare to?"

"How do you mean?" said the Duke, with a puzzled air.

"Well, you have said yourself that this is a fortress. An hour ago,
perhaps, Lupin was resolved to enter this room, but is he now?"

"I see what you mean," said the Duke, in a tone of disappointment.

"Yes; you see that now it needs the devil's own courage. He must risk
everything to gain everything, and throw off the mask. Is Lupin going
to throw himself into the wolf's jaws? I dare not think it. What do you
think about it?"

Guerchard's husky voice had hardened to a rough harshness; there was a
ring of acute anxiety in it, and under the anxiety a faint note of
challenge, of a challenge that dare not make itself too distinct. His
anxious, challenging eyes burned on the face of the Duke, as if they
strove with all intensity to pierce a mask.

The Duke looked at him curiously, as if he were trying to divine what
he would be at, but with a careless curiosity, as if it were a matter
of indifference to him what the detective's object was; then he said
carelessly: "Well, you ought to know better than I. You have known him
for ten years ...." He paused, and added with just the faintest stress
in his tone, "At least, by reputation."

The anxiety in the detective's face grew plainer, it almost gave him
the air of being unnerved; and he said quickly, in a jerky voice: "Yes,
and I know his way of acting too. During the last ten years I have
learnt to unravel his intrigues--to understand and anticipate his
manoeuvres.... Oh, his is a clever system! ... Instead of lying low, as
you'd expect, he attacks his opponent ... openly.... He confuses
him--at least, he tries to." He smiled a half-confident, a
half-doubtful smile, "It is a mass of entangled, mysterious
combinations. I've been caught in them myself again and again. You
smile?"

"It interests me so," said the Duke, in a tone of apology.

"Oh, it interests me," said Guerchard, with a snarl. "But this time I
see my way clearly. No more tricks--no more secret paths ... We're
fighting in the light of day." He paused, and said in a clear, sneering
voice, "Lupin has pluck, perhaps, but it's only thief's pluck."

"Oh, is it?" said the Duke sharply, and there was a sudden faint
glitter in his eyes.

"Yes; rogues have very poor qualities," sneered Guerchard.

"One can't have everything," said the Duke quietly; but his languid air
had fallen from him.

"Their ambushes, their attacks, their fine tactics aren't up to much,"
said Guerchard, smiling contemptuously.

"You go a trifle too far, I think," said the Duke, smiling with equal
contempt.

They looked one another in the eyes with a long, lingering look. They
had suddenly the air of fencers who have lost their tempers, and are
twisting the buttons off their foils.

"Not a bit of it, your Grace," said Guerchard; and his voice lingered
on the words "your Grace" with a contemptuous stress. "This famous
Lupin is immensely overrated."

"However, he has done some things which aren't half bad," said the
Duke, with his old charming smile.

He had the air of a duelist drawing his blade lovingly through his
fingers before he falls to.

"Oh, has he?" said Guerchard scornfully.

"Yes; one must be fair. Last night's burglary, for instance: it is not
unheard of, but it wasn't half bad. And that theft of the motorcars: it
was a neat piece of work," said the Duke in a gentle, insolent voice,
infinitely aggravating.

Guerchard snorted scornfully.

"And a robbery at the British Embassy, another at the Treasury, and a
third at M. Lepine's--all in the same week--it wasn't half bad, don't
you know?" said the Duke, in the same gentle, irritating voice.

"Oh, no, it wasn't. But--"

"And the time when he contrived to pass as Guerchard--the Great
Guerchard--do you remember that?" the Duke interrupted. "Come, come--to
give the devil his due--between ourselves--it wasn't half bad."

"No," snarled Guerchard. "But he has done better than that lately....
Why don't you speak of that?"

"Of what?" said the Duke.

"Of the time when he passed as the Duke of Charmerace," snapped
Guerchard.

"What! Did he do that?" cried the Duke; and then he added slowly, "But,
you know, I'm like you--I'm so easy to imitate."

"What would have been amusing, your Grace, would have been to get as
far as actual marriage," said Guerchard more calmly.

"Oh, if he had wanted to," said the Duke; and he threw out his hands.
"But you know--married life--for Lupin."

"A large fortune ... a pretty girl," said Guerchard, in a mocking tone.

"He must be in love with some one else," said the Duke.

"A thief, perhaps," sneered Guerchard.

"Like himself.... And then, if you wish to know what I think, he must
have found his fiancee rather trying," said the Duke, with his charming
smile.

"After all, it's pitiful--heartrending, you must admit it, that, on the
very eve of his marriage, he was such a fool as to throw off the mask.
And yet at bottom it's quite logical; it's Lupin coming out through
Charmerace. He had to grab at the dowry at the risk of losing the
girl," said Guerchard, in a reflective tone; but his eyes were intent
on the face of the Duke.

"Perhaps that's what one should call a marriage of reason," said the
Duke, with a faint smile.

"What a fall!" said Guerchard, in a taunting voice. "To be expected,
eagerly, at the Princess's to-morrow evening, and to pass the evening
in a police-station ... to have intended in a month's time, as the Duke
of Charmerace, to mount the steps of the Madeleine with all pomp and to
fall down the father-in-law's staircase this evening--this very
evening"--his voice rose suddenly on a note of savage triumph--"with
the handcuffs on! What? Is that a good enough revenge for
Guerchard--for that poor old idiot, Guerchard? The rogues' Brummel in a
convict's cap! The gentleman-burglar in a gaol! For Lupin it's only a
trifling annoyance, but for a duke it's a disaster! Come, in your turn,
be frank: don't you find that amusing?"

The Duke rose quietly, and said coldly, "Have you finished?"

"DO you?" cried Guerchard; and he rose and faced him.

"Oh, yes; I find it quite amusing," said the Duke lightly.

"And so do I," cried Guerchard.

"No; you're frightened," said the Duke calmly.

"Frightened!" cried Guerchard, with a savage laugh.

"Yes, you're frightened," said the Duke. "And don't think, policeman,
that because I'm familiar with you, I throw off a mask. I don't wear
one. I've none to throw off. I AM the Duke of Charmerace."

"You lie! You escaped from the Sante four years ago. You are Lupin! I
recognize you now."

"Prove it," said the Duke scornfully.

"I will!" cried Guerchard.

"You won't. I AM the Duke of Charmerace."

Guerchard laughed wildly.

"Don't laugh. You know nothing--nothing, dear boy," said the Duke
tauntingly.

"Dear boy?" cried Guerchard triumphantly, as if the word had been a
confession.

"What do I risk?" said the Duke, with scathing contempt. "Can you
arrest me? ... You can arrest Lupin ... but arrest the Duke of
Charmerace, an honourable gentleman, member of the Jockey Club, and of
the Union, residing at his house, 34 B, University Street ... arrest
the Duke of Charmerace, the fiance of Mademoiselle Gournay-Martin?"

"Scoundrel!" cried Guerchard, pale with sudden, helpless fury.

"Well, do it," taunted the Duke. "Be an ass.... Make yourself the
laughing-stock of Paris ... call your coppers in. Have you a proof--one
single proof? Not one."

"Oh, I shall get them," howled Guerchard, beside himself.

"I think you may," said the Duke coolly. "And you might be able to
arrest me next week ... the day after to-morrow perhaps ... perhaps
never ... but not to-night, that's certain."

"Oh, if only somebody could hear you!" gasped Guerchard.

"Now, don't excite yourself," said the Duke. "That won't produce any
proofs for you.... The fact is, M. Formery told you the truth when he
said that, when it is a case of Lupin, you lose your head. Ah, that
Formery--there is an intelligent man if you like."

"At all events, the coronet is safe ... to-night--"

"Wait, my good chap ... wait," said the Duke slowly; and then he
snapped out: "Do you know what's behind that door?" and he flung out
his hand towards the door of the inner drawing-room, with a mysterious,
sinister air.

"What?" cried Guerchard; and he whipped round and faced the door, with
his eyes starting out of his head.

"Get out, you funk!" said the Duke, with a great laugh.

"Hang you!" said Guerchard shrilly.

"I said that you were going to be absolutely pitiable," said the Duke,
and he laughed again cruelly.

"Oh, go on talking, do!" cried Guerchard, mopping his forehead.

"Absolutely pitiable," said the Duke, with a cold, disquieting
certainty. "As the hand of that clock moves nearer and nearer midnight,
you will grow more and more terrified." He paused, and then shouted
violently, "Attention!"

Guerchard jumped; and then he swore.

"Your nerves are on edge," said the Duke, laughing.

"Joker!" snarled Guerchard.

"Oh, you're as brave as the next man. But who can stand the anguish of
the unknown thing which is bound to happen? ... I'm right. You feel it,
you're sure of it. At the end of these few fixed minutes an inevitable,
fated event must happen. Don't shrug your shoulders, man; you're green
with fear."

The Duke was no longer a smiling, cynical dandy. There emanated from
him an impression of vivid, terrible force. His voice had deepened. It
thrilled with a consciousness of irresistible power; it was
overwhelming, paralyzing. His eyes were terrible.

"My men are outside ... I'm armed," stammered Guerchard.

"Child! Bear in mind ... bear in mind that it is always when you have
foreseen everything, arranged everything, made every combination ...
bear in mind that it is always then that some accident dashes your
whole structure to the ground," said the Duke, in the same deep,
thrilling voice. "Remember that it is always at the very moment at
which you are going to triumph that he beats you, that he only lets you
reach the top of the ladder to throw you more easily to the ground."

"Confess, then, that you are Lupin," muttered Guerchard.

"I thought you were sure of it," said the Duke in a jeering tone.

Guerchard dragged the handcuffs out of his pocket, and said between his
teeth, "I don't know what prevents me, my boy."

The Duke drew himself up, and said haughtily, "That's enough."

"What?" cried Guerchard.

"I say that that's enough," said the Duke sternly. "It's all very well
for me to play at being familiar with you, but don't you call me 'my
boy.'"

"Oh, you won't impose on me much longer," muttered Guerchard; and his
bloodshot, haggard eyes scanned the Duke's face in an agony, an anguish
of doubting impotence.

"If I'm Lupin, arrest me," said the Duke.

"I'll arrest you in three minutes from now, or the coronet will be
untouched," cried Guerchard in a firmer tone.

"In three minutes from now the coronet will have been stolen; and you
will not arrest me," said the Duke, in a tone of chilling certainty.

"But I will! I swear I will!" cried Guerchard.

"Don't swear any foolish oaths! ... THERE ARE ONLY TWO MINUTES LEFT,"
said the Duke; and he drew a revolver from his pocket.

"No, you don't!" cried Guerchard, drawing a revolver in his turn.

"What's the matter?" said the Duke, with an air of surprise. "You
haven't forbidden me to shoot Lupin. I have my revolver ready, since
he's going to come.... THERE'S ONLY A MINUTE LEFT."

"There are plenty of us," said Guerchard; and he went towards the door.

"Funk!" said the Duke scornfully.

Guerchard turned sharply. "Very well," he said, "I'll stick it out
alone."

"How rash!" sneered the Duke.

Guerchard ground his teeth. He was panting; his bloodshot eyes rolled
in their sockets; the beads of cold sweat stood out on his forehead. He
came back towards the table on unsteady feet, trembling from head to
foot in the last excitation of the nerves. He kept jerking his head to
shake away the mist which kept dimming his eyes.

"At your slightest gesture, at your slightest movement, I'll fire," he
said jerkily, and covered the Duke with his revolver.

"I call myself the Duke of Charmerace. You will be arrested to-morrow!"
said the Duke, in a compelling, thrilling voice.

"I don't care a curse!" cried Guerchard.

"Only FIFTY SECONDS!" said the Duke.

"Yes, yes," muttered Guerchard huskily. And his eyes shot from the
coronet to the Duke, from the Duke to the coronet.

"In fifty seconds the coronet will be stolen," said the Duke.

"No!" cried Guerchard furiously.

"Yes," said the Duke coldly.

"No! no! no!" cried Guerchard.

Their eyes turned to the clock.

To Guerchard the hands seemed to be standing still. He could have sworn
at them for their slowness.

Then the first stroke rang out; and the eyes of the two men met like
crossing blades. Twice the Duke made the slightest movement. Twice
Guerchard started forward to meet it.

At the last stroke both their hands shot out. Guerchard's fell heavily
on the case which held the coronet. The Duke's fell on the brim of his
hat; and he picked it up.

Guerchard gasped and choked. Then he cried triumphantly:

"I HAVE it; now then, have I won? Have I been fooled this time? Has
Lupin got the coronet?"

"It doesn't look like it. But are you quite sure?" said the Duke gaily.

"Sure?" cried Guerchard.

"It's only the weight of it," said the Duke, repressing a laugh.
"Doesn't it strike you that it's just a trifle light?"

"What?" cried Guerchard.

"This is merely an imitation." said the Duke, with a gentle laugh.

"Hell and damnation!" howled Guerchard. "Bonavent! Dieusy!"

The door flew open, and half a dozen detectives rushed in.

Guerchard sank into a chair, stupefied, paralyzed; this blow, on the
top of the strain of the struggle with the Duke, had broken him.

"Gentlemen," said the Duke sadly, "the coronet has been stolen."

They broke into cries of surprise and bewilderment, surrounding the
gasping Guerchard with excited questions.

The Duke walked quietly out of the room.

Guerchard sobbed twice; his eyes opened, and in a dazed fashion
wandered from face to face; he said faintly: "Where is he?"

"Where's who?" said Bonavent.

"The Duke--the Duke!" gasped Guerchard.

"Why, he's gone!" said Bonavent.

Guerchard staggered to his feet and cried hoarsely, frantically: "Stop
him from leaving the house! Follow him! Arrest him! Catch him before he
gets home!"




CHAPTER XX

LUPIN COMES HOME


The cold light of the early September morning illumined but dimly the
charming smoking-room of the Duke of Charmerace in his house at 34 B,
University Street, though it stole in through two large windows. The
smoking-room was on the first floor; and the Duke's bedroom opened into
it. It was furnished in the most luxurious fashion, but with a taste
which nowadays infrequently accompanies luxury. The chairs were of the
most comfortable, but their lines were excellent; the couch against the
wall, between the two windows, was the last word in the matter of
comfort. The colour scheme, of a light greyish-blue, was almost too
bright for a man's room; it would have better suited a boudoir. It
suggested that the owner of the room enjoyed an uncommon lightness and
cheerfulness of temperament. On the walls, with wide gaps between them
so that they did not clash, hung three or four excellent pictures. Two
ballet-girls by Degas, a group of shepherdesses and shepherds, in pink
and blue and white beribboned silk, by Fragonard, a portrait of a woman
by Bastien-Lepage, a charming Corot, and two Conder fans showed that
the taste of their fortunate owner was at any rate eclectic. At the end
of the room was, of all curious things, the opening into the well of a
lift. The doors of it were open, though the lift itself was on some
other floor. To the left of the opening stood a book-case, its shelves
loaded with books of a kind rather suited to a cultivated, thoughtful
man than to an idle dandy.

Beside the window, half-hidden, and peering through the side of the
curtain into the street, stood M. Charolais. But it was hardly the M.
Charolais who had paid M. Gournay-Martin that visit at the Chateau de
Charmerace, and departed so firmly in the millionaire's favourite
motor-car. This was a paler M. Charolais; he lacked altogether the
rich, ruddy complexion of the millionaire's visitor. His nose, too, was
thinner, and showed none of the ripe acquaintance with the vintages of
the world which had been so plainly displayed on it during its owner's
visit to the country. Again, hair and eyebrows were no longer black,
but fair; and his hair was no longer curly and luxuriant, but thin and
lank. His moustache had vanished, and along with it the dress of a
well-to-do provincial man of business. He wore a livery of the
Charmeraces, and at that early morning hour had not yet assumed the
blue waistcoat which is an integral part of it. Indeed it would have
required an acute and experienced observer to recognize in him the
bogus purchaser of the Mercrac. Only his eyes, his close-set eyes, were
unchanged.

Walking restlessly up and down the middle of the room, keeping out of
sight of the windows, was Victoire. She wore a very anxious air, as did
Charolais too. By the door stood Bernard Charolais; and his natural,
boyish timidity, to judge from his frightened eyes, had assumed an
acute phase.

"By the Lord, we're done!" cried Charolais, starting back from the
window. "That was the front-door bell."

"No, it was only the hall clock," said Bernard.

"That's seven o'clock! Oh, where can he be?" said Victoire, wringing
her hands. "The coup was fixed for midnight.... Where can he be?"

"They must be after him," said Charolais. "And he daren't come home."
Gingerly he drew back the curtain and resumed his watch.

"I've sent down the lift to the bottom, in case he should come back by
the secret entrance," said Victoire; and she went to the opening into
the well of the lift and stood looking down it, listening with all her
ears.

"Then why, in the devil's name, have you left the doors open?" cried
Charolais irritably. "How do you expect the lift to come up if the
doors are open?"

"I must be off my head!" cried Victoire.

She stepped to the side of the lift and pressed a button. The doors
closed, and there was a grunting click of heavy machinery settling into
a new position.

"Suppose we telephone to Justin at the Passy house?" said Victoire.

"What on earth's the good of that?" said Charolais impatiently. "Justin
knows no more than we do. How can he know any more?"

"The best thing we can do is to get out," said Bernard, in a shaky
voice.

"No, no; he will come. I haven't given up hope," Victoire protested.
"He's sure to come; and he may need us."

"But, hang it all! Suppose the police come! Suppose they ransack his
papers.... He hasn't told us what to do ... we are not ready for
them.... What are we to do?" cried Charolais, in a tone of despair.

"Well, I'm worse off than you are; and I'm not making a fuss. If the
police come they'll arrest me," said Victoire.

"Perhaps they've arrested him," said Bernard, in his shaky voice.

"Don't talk like that," said Victoire fretfully. "Isn't it bad enough
to wait and wait, without your croaking like a scared crow?"

She started again her pacing up and down the room, twisting her hands,
and now and again moistening her dry lips with the tip of her tongue.

Presently she said: "Are those two plain-clothes men still there
watching?" And in her anxiety she came a step nearer the window.

"Keep away from the window!" snapped Charolais. "Do you want to be
recognized, you great idiot?" Then he added, more quietly, "They're
still there all right, curse them, in front of the cafe.... Hullo!"

"What is it, now?" cried Victoire, starting.

"A copper and a detective running," said Charolais. "They are running
for all they're worth."

"Are they coming this way?" said Victoire; and she ran to the door and
caught hold of the handle.

"No," said Charolais.

"Thank goodness!" said Victoire.

"They're running to the two men watching the house ... they're telling
them something. Oh, hang it, they're all running down the street."

"This way? ... Are they coming this way?" cried Victoire faintly; and
she pressed her hand to her side.

"They are!" cried Charolais. "They are!" And he dropped the curtain
with an oath.

"And he isn't here! Suppose they come.... Suppose he comes to the front
door! They'll catch him!" cried Victoire.

There came a startling peal at the front-door bell. They stood frozen
to stone, their eyes fixed on one another, staring.

The bell had hardly stopped ringing, when there was a slow, whirring
noise. The doors of the lift flew open, and the Duke stepped out of it.
But what a changed figure from the admirably dressed dandy who had
walked through the startled detectives and out of the house of M.
Gournay-Martin at midnight! He was pale, exhausted, almost fainting.
His eyes were dim in a livid face; his lips were grey. He was panting
heavily. He was splashed with mud from head to foot: one sleeve of his
coat was torn along half its length. The sole of his left-hand pump was
half off; and his cut foot showed white and red through the torn sock.

"The master! The master!" cried Charolais in a tone of extravagant
relief; and he danced round the room snapping his fingers.

"You're wounded?" cried Victoire.

"No," said Arsene Lupin.

The front-door bell rang out again, startling, threatening, terrifying.

The note of danger seemed to brace Lupin, to spur him to a last effort.

He pulled himself together, and said in a hoarse but steady voice:
"Your waistcoat, Charolais.... Go and open the door ... not too quickly
... fumble the bolts.... Bernard, shut the book-case. Victoire, get out
of sight, do you want to ruin us all? Be smart now, all of you. Be
smart!"

He staggered past them into his bedroom, and slammed the door. Victoire
and Charolais hurried out of the room, through the anteroom, on to the
landing. Victoire ran upstairs, Charolais went slowly down. Bernard
pressed the button. The doors of the lift shut and there was a slow
whirring as it went down. He pressed another button, and the book-case
slid slowly across and hid the opening into the lift-well. Bernard ran
out of the room and up the stairs.

Charolais went to the front door and fumbled with the bolts. He bawled
through the door to the visitors not to be in such a hurry at that hour
in the morning; and they bawled furiously at him to be quick, and
knocked and rang again and again. He was fully three minutes fumbling
with the bolts, which were already drawn. At last he opened the door an
inch or two, and looked out.

On the instant the door was dashed open, flinging him back against the
wall; and Bonavent and Dieusy rushed past him, up the stairs, as hard
as they could pelt. A brown-faced, nervous, active policeman followed
them in and stopped to guard the door.

On the landing the detectives paused, and looked at one another,
hesitating.

"Which way did he go?" said Bonavent. "We were on his very heels."

"I don't know; but we've jolly well stopped his getting into his own
house; and that's the main thing," said Dieusy triumphantly.

"But are you sure it was him?" said Bonavent, stepping into the
anteroom.

"I can swear to it," said Dieusy confidently; and he followed him.

Charolais came rushing up the stairs and caught them up as they were
entering the smoking-room:

"Here! What's all this?" he cried. "You mustn't come in here! His Grace
isn't awake yet."

"Awake? Awake? Your precious Duke has been galloping all night," cried
Dieusy. "And he runs devilish well, too."

The door of the bedroom opened; and Lupin stood on the threshold in
slippers and pyjamas.

"What's all this?" he snapped, with the irritation of a man whose sleep
has been disturbed; and his tousled hair and eyes dim with exhaustion
gave him every appearance of being still heavy with sleep.

The eyes and mouths of Bonavent and Dieusy opened wide; and they stared
at him blankly, in utter bewilderment and wonder.

"Is it you who are making all this noise?" said Lupin, frowning at
them. "Why, I know you two; you're in the service of M. Guerchard."

"Yes, your Grace," stammered Bonavent.

"Well, what are you doing here? What is it you want?" said Lupin.

"Oh, nothing, your Grace ... nothing ... there's been a mistake,"
stammered Bonavent.

"A mistake?" said Lupin haughtily. "I should think there had been a
mistake. But I take it that this is Guerchard's doing. I'd better deal
with him directly. You two can go." He turned to Charolais and added
curtly, "Show them out."

Charolais opened the door, and the two detectives went out of the room
with the slinking air of whipped dogs. They went down the stairs in
silence, slowly, reflectively; and Charolais let them out of the front
door.

As they went down the steps Dieusy said: "What a howler! Guerchard
risks getting the sack for this!"

"I told you so," said Bonavent. "A duke's a duke."

When the door closed behind the two detectives Lupin tottered across
the room, dropped on to the couch with a groan of exhaustion, and
closed his eyes. Presently the door opened, Victoire came in, saw his
attitude of exhaustion, and with a startled cry ran to his side.

"Oh, dearie! dearie!" she cried. "Pull yourself together! Oh, do try to
pull yourself together." She caught his cold hands and began to rub
them, murmuring words of endearment like a mother over a young child.
Lupin did not open his eyes; Charolais came in.

"Some breakfast!" she cried. "Bring his breakfast ... he's faint ...
he's had nothing to eat this morning. Can you eat some breakfast,
dearie?"

"Yes," said Lupin faintly.

"Hurry up with it," said Victoire in urgent, imperative tones; and
Charolais left the room at a run.

"Oh, what a life you lead!" said Victoire, or, to be exact, she wailed
it. "Are you never going to change? You're as white as a sheet....
Can't you speak, dearie?"

She stooped and lifted his legs on to the couch.

He stretched himself, and, without opening his eyes, said in a faint
voice: "Oh, Victoire, what a fright I've had!"

"You? You've been frightened?" cried Victoire, amazed.

"Yes. You needn't tell the others, though. But I've had a night of it
... I did play the fool so ... I must have been absolutely mad. Once I
had changed the coronet under that fat old fool Gournay-Martin's very
eyes ... once you and Sonia were out of their clutches, all I had to do
was to slip away. Did I? Not a bit of it! I stayed there out of sheer
bravado, just to score off Guerchard.... And then I ... I, who pride
myself on being as cool as a cucumber ... I did the one thing I ought
not to have done.... Instead of going quietly away as the Duke of
Charmerace ... what do you think I did? ... I bolted ... I started
running ... running like a thief.... In about two seconds I saw the
slip I had made. It did not take me longer; but that was too
long--Guerchard's men were on my track ... I was done for."

"Then Guerchard understood--he recognized you?" said Victoire anxiously.

"As soon as the first paralysis had passed, Guerchard dared to see
clearly ... to see the truth," said Lupin. "And then it was a chase.
There were ten--fifteen of them on my heels. Out of breath--grunting,
furious--a mob--a regular mob. I had passed the night before in a
motor-car. I was dead beat. In fact, I was done for before I started
... and they were gaining ground all the time."

"Why didn't you hide?" said Victoire.

"For a long while they were too close. They must have been within five
feet of me. I was done. Then I was crossing one of the bridges. ...
There was the Seine ... handy ... I made up my mind that, rather than
be taken, I'd make an end of it ... I'd throw myself over."

"Good Lord!--and then?" cried Victoire.

"Then I had a revulsion of feeling. At any rate, I'd stick it out to
the end. I gave myself another minute... one more minute--the last, and
I had my revolver on me... but during that minute I put forth every
ounce of strength I had left ... I began to gain ground ... I had them
pretty well strung out already ... they were blown too. The knowledge
gave me back my courage, and I plugged on ... my feet did not feel so
much as though they were made of lead. I began to run away from them
... they were dropping behind ... all of them but one ... he stuck to
me. We went at a jog-trot, a slow jog-trot, for I don't know how long.
Then we dropped to a walk--we could run no more; and on we went. My
strength and wind began to come back. I suppose my pursuer's did too;
for exactly what I expected happened. He gave a yell and dashed for me.
I was ready for him. I pretended to start running, and when he was
within three yards of me I dropped on one knee, caught his ankles, and
chucked him over my head. I don't know whether he broke his neck or
not. I hope he did."

"Splendid!" said Victoire. "Splendid!"

"Well, there I was, outside Paris, and I'm hanged if I know where. I
went on half a mile, and then I rested. Oh, how sleepy I was! I would
have given a hundred thousand francs for an hour's sleep--cheerfully.
But I dared not let myself sleep. I had to get back here unseen. There
were you and Sonia."

"Sonia? Another woman?" cried Victoire. "Oh, it's then that I'm
frightened ... when you get a woman mixed up in your game. Always, when
you come to grief ... when you really get into danger, there's a woman
in it."

"Oh, but she's charming!" protested Lupin.

"They always are," said Victoire drily. "But go on. Tell me how you got
here."

"Well, I knew it was going to be a tough job, so I took a good rest--an
hour, I should think. And then I started to walk back. I found that I
had come a devil of a way--I must have gone at Marathon pace. I walked
and walked, and at last I got into Paris, and found myself with still a
couple of miles to go. It was all right now; I should soon find a cab.
But the luck was dead against me. I heard a man come round the corner
of a side-street into a long street I was walking down. He gave a yell,
and came bucketing after me. It was that hound Dieusy. He had
recognized my figure. Off I went; and the chase began again. I led him
a dance, but I couldn't shake him off. All the while I was working my
way towards home. Then, just at last, I spurted for all I was worth,
got out of his sight, bolted round the corner of the street into the
secret entrance, and here I am." He smiled weakly, and added, "Oh, my
dear Victoire, what a profession it is!"




CHAPTER XXI

THE CUTTING OF THE TELEPHONE WIRES


The door opened, and in came Charolais, bearing a tray.

"Here's your breakfast, master," he said.

"Don't call me master--that's how his men address Guerchard. It's a
disgusting practice," said Lupin severely.

Victoire and Charolais were quick laying the table. Charolais kept up a
running fire of questions as he did it; but Lupin did not trouble to
answer them. He lay back, relaxed, drawing deep breaths. Already his
lips had lost their greyness, and were pink; there was a suggestion of
blood under the skin of his pale face. They soon had the table laid;
and he walked to it on fairly steady feet. He sat down; Charolais
whipped off a cover, and said:

"Anyhow, you've got out of the mess neatly. It was a jolly smart
escape."

"Oh, yes. So far it's all right," said Lupin. "But there's going to be
trouble presently--lots of it. I shall want all my wits. We all shall."

He fell upon his breakfast with the appetite but not the manners of a
wolf. Charolais went out of the room. Victoire hovered about him,
pouring out his coffee and putting sugar into it.

"By Jove, how good these eggs are!" he said. "I think that, of all the
thousand ways of cooking eggs, en cocotte is the best."

"Heavens! how empty I was!" he said presently. "What a meal I'm making!
It's really a very healthy life, this of mine, Victoire. I feel much
better already."

"Oh, yes; it's all very well to talk," said Victoire, in a scolding
tone; for since he was better, she felt, as a good woman should, that
the time had come to put in a word out of season. "But, all the same,
you're trying to kill yourself--that's what you're doing. Just because
you're young you abuse your youth. It won't last for ever; and you'll
be sorry you used it up before it's time. And this life of lies and
thefts and of all kinds of improper things--I suppose it's going to
begin all over again. It's no good your getting a lesson. It's just
thrown away upon you."

"What I want next is a bath," said Lupin.

"It's all very well your pretending not to listen to me, when you know
very well that I'm speaking for your good," she went on, raising her
voice a little. "But I tell you that all this is going to end badly. To
be a thief gives you no position in the world--no position at all--and
when I think of what you made me do the night before last, I'm just
horrified at myself."

"We'd better not talk about that--the mess you made of it! It was
positively excruciating!" said Lupin.

"And what did you expect? I'm an honest woman, I am!" said Victoire
sharply. "I wasn't brought up to do things like that, thank goodness!
And to begin at my time of life!"

"It's true, and I often ask myself how you bring yourself to stick to
me," said Lupin, in a reflective, quite impersonal tone. "Please pour
me out another cup of coffee."

"That's what I'm always asking myself," said Victoire, pouring out the
coffee. "I don't know--I give it up. I suppose it is because I'm fond
of you."

"Yes, and I'm very fond of you, my dear Victoire," said Lupin, in a
coaxing tone.

"And then, look you, there are things that there's no understanding. I
often talked to your poor mother about them. Oh, your poor mother!
Whatever would she have said to these goings-on?"

Lupin helped himself to another cutlet; his eyes twinkled and he said,
"I'm not sure that she would have been very much surprised. I always
told her that I was going to punish society for the way it had treated
her. Do you think she would have been surprised?"

"Oh, nothing you did would have surprised her," said Victoire. "When
you were quite a little boy you were always making us wonder. You gave
yourself such airs, and you had such nice manners of your
own--altogether different from the other boys. And you were already a
bad boy, when you were only seven years old, full of all kinds of
tricks; and already you had begun to steal."

"Oh, only sugar," protested Lupin.

"Yes, you began by stealing sugar," said Victoire, in the severe tones
of a moralist. "And then it was jam, and then it was pennies. Oh, it
was all very well at that age--a little thief is pretty enough. But
now--when you're twenty-eight years old."

"Really, Victoire, you're absolutely depressing," said Lupin, yawning;
and he helped himself to jam.

"I know very well that you're all right at heart," said Victoire. "Of
course you only rob the rich, and you've always been kind to the
poor.... Yes; there's no doubt about it: you have a good heart."

"I can't help it--what about it?" said Lupin, smiling.

"Well, you ought to have different ideas in your head. Why are you a
burglar?"

"You ought to try it yourself, my dear Victoire," said Lupin gently;
and he watched her with a humorous eye.

"Goodness, what a thing to say!" cried Victoire.

"I assure you, you ought," said Lupin, in a tone of thoughtful
conviction. "I've tried everything. I've taken my degree in medicine
and in law. I have been an actor, and a professor of Jiu-jitsu. I have
even been a member of the detective force, like that wretched
Guerchard. Oh, what a dirty world that is! Then I launched out into
society. I have been a duke. Well, I give you my word that not one of
these professions equals that of burglar--not even the profession of
Duke. There is so much of the unexpected in it, Victoire--the splendid
unexpected.... And then, it's full of variety, so terrible, so
fascinating." His voice sank a little, and he added, "And what fun it
is!"

"Fun!" cried Victoire.

"Yes ... these rich men, these swells in their luxury--when one
relieves them of a bank-note, how they do howl! ... You should have
seen that fat old Gournay-Martin when I relieved him of his
treasures--what an agony! You almost heard the death-rattle in his
throat. And then the coronet! In the derangement of their minds--and it
was sheer derangement, mind you--already prepared at Charmerace, in the
derangement of Guerchard, I had only to put out my hand and pluck the
coronet. And the joy, the ineffable joy of enraging the police! To see
Guerchard's furious eyes when I downed him.... And look round you!" He
waved his hand round the luxurious room. "Duke of Charmerace! This
trade leads to everything ... to everything on condition that one
sticks to it ....I tell you, Victoire, that when one cannot be a great
artist or a great soldier, the only thing to be is a great thief!"

"Oh, be quiet!" cried Victoire. "Don't talk like that. You're working
yourself up; you're intoxicating yourself! And all that, it is not
Catholic. Come, at your age, you ought to have one idea in your head
which should drive out all these others, which should make you forget
all these thefts.... Love ... that would change you, I'm sure of it.
That would make another man of you. You ought to marry."

"Yes ... perhaps ... that would make another man of me. That's what
I've been thinking. I believe you're right," said Lupin thoughtfully.

"Is that true? Have you really been thinking of it?" cried Victoire
joyfully.

"Yes," said Lupin, smiling at her eagerness. "I have been thinking
about it--seriously."

"No more messing about--no more intrigues. But a real woman ... a woman
for life?" cried Victoire.

"Yes," said Lupin softly; and his eyes were shining in a very grave
face.

"Is it serious--is it real love, dearie?" said Victoire. "What's she
like?"

"She's beautiful," said Lupin.

"Oh, trust you for that. Is she a blonde or a brunette?"

"She's very fair and delicate--like a princess in a fairy tale," said
Lupin softly.

"What is she? What does she do?" said Victoire.

"Well, since you ask me, she's a thief," said Lupin with a mischievous
smile.

"Good Heavens!" cried Victoire.

"But she's a very charming thief," said Lupin; and he rose smiling.

He lighted a cigar, stretched himself and yawned: "She had ever so much
more reason for stealing than ever I had," he said. "And she has always
hated it like poison."

"Well, that's something," said Victoire; and her blank and fallen face
brightened a little.

Lupin walked up and down the room, breathing out long luxurious puffs
of smoke from his excellent cigar, and watching Victoire with a
humorous eye. He walked across to his book-shelf, and scanned the
titles of his books with an appreciative, almost affectionate smile.

"This is a very pleasant interlude," he said languidly. "But I don't
suppose it's going to last very long. As soon as Guerchard recovers
from the shock of learning that I spent a quiet night in my ducal bed
as an honest duke should, he'll be getting to work with positively
furious energy, confound him! I could do with a whole day's
sleep--twenty-four solid hours of it."

"I'm sure you could, dearie," said Victoire sympathetically.

"The girl I'm going to marry is Sonia Kritchnoff," he said.

"Sonia? That dear child! But I love her already!" cried Victoire.
"Sonia, but why did you say she was a thief? That was a silly thing to
say."

"It's my extraordinary sense of humour," said Lupin.

The door opened and Charolais bustled in: "Shall I clear away the
breakfast?" he said.

Lupin nodded; and then the telephone bell rang. He put his finger on
his lips and went to it.

"Are you there?" he said. "Oh, it's you, Germaine.... Good morning....
Oh, yes, I had a good night--excellent, thank you.... You want to speak
to me presently? ... You're waiting for me at the Ritz?"

"Don't go--don't go--it isn't safe," said Victoire, in a whisper.

"All right, I'll be with you in about half an hour, or perhaps
three-quarters. I'm not dressed yet ... but I'm ever so much more
impatient than you ... good-bye for the present." He put the receiver
on the stand.

"It's a trap," said Charolais.

"Never mind, what if it is? Is it so very serious?" said Lupin.
"There'll be nothing but traps now; and if I can find the time I shall
certainly go and take a look at that one."

"And if she knows everything? If she's taking her revenge ... if she's
getting you there to have you arrested?" said Victoire.

"Yes, M. Formery is probably at the Ritz with Gournay-Martin. They're
probably all of them there, weighing the coronet," said Lupin, with a
chuckle.

He hesitated a moment, reflecting; then he said, "How silly you are! If
they wanted to arrest me, if they had the material proof which they
haven't got, Guerchard would be here already!"

"Then why did they chase you last night?" said Charolais.

"The coronet," said Lupin. "Wasn't that reason enough? But, as it
turned out, they didn't catch me: and when the detectives did come
here, they disturbed me in my sleep. And that me was ever so much more
me than the man they followed. And then the proofs ... they must have
proofs. There aren't any--or rather, what there are, I've got!" He
pointed to a small safe let into the wall. "In that safe are the
coronet, and, above all, the death certificate of the Duke of
Charmerace ... everything that Guerchard must have to induce M. Formery
to proceed. But still, there is a risk--I think I'd better have those
things handy in case I have to bolt."

He went into his bedroom and came back with the key of the safe and a
kit-bag. He opened the safe and took out the coronet, the real coronet
of the Princesse de Lamballe, and along with it a pocket-book with a
few papers in it. He set the pocket-book on the table, ready to put in
his coat-pocket when he should have dressed, and dropped the coronet
into the kit-bag.

"I'm glad I have that death certificate; it makes it much safer," he
said. "If ever they do nab me, I don't wish that rascal Guerchard to
accuse me of having murdered the Duke. It might prejudice me badly.
I've not murdered anybody yet."

"That comes of having a good heart," said Victoire proudly.

"Not even the Duke of Charmerace," said Charolais sadly. "And it would
have been so easy when he was ill--just one little draught. And he was
in such a perfect place--so out of the way--no doctors."

"You do have such disgusting ideas, Charolais," said Lupin, in a tone
of severe reproof.

"Instead of which you went and saved his life," said Charolais, in a
tone of deep discontent; and he went on clearing the table.

"I did, I did: I had grown quite fond of him," said Lupin, with a
meditative air. "For one thing, he was so very like one. I'm not sure
that he wasn't even better-looking."

"No; he was just like you," said Victoire, with decision. "Any one
would have said you were twin brothers."

"It gave me quite a shock the first time I saw his portrait," said
Lupin. "You remember, Charolais? It was three years ago, the day, or
rather the night, of the first Gournay-Martin burglary at Charmerace.
Do you remember?"

"Do I remember?" said Charolais. "It was I who pointed out the likeness
to you. I said, 'He's the very spit of you, master.' And you said,
'There's something to be done with that, Charolais.' And then off you
started for the ice and snow and found the Duke, and became his friend;
and then he went and died, not that you'd have helped him to, if he
hadn't."

"Poor Charmerace. He was indeed grand seigneur. With him a great name
was about to be extinguished.... Did I hesitate? ... No.... I continued
it," said Lupin.

He paused and looked at the clock. "A quarter to eight," he said,
hesitating. "Shall I telephone to Sonia, or shall I not? Oh, there's no
hurry; let the poor child sleep on. She must be worn out after that
night-journey and that cursed Guerchard's persecution yesterday. I'll
dress first, and telephone to her afterwards. I'd better be getting
dressed, by the way. The work I've got to do can't be done in pyjamas.
I wish it could; for bed's the place for me. My wits aren't quite as
clear as I could wish them to deal with an awkward business like this.
Well, I must do the best I can with them."

He yawned and went to the bedroom, leaving the pocket-book on the table.

"Bring my shaving-water, Charolais, and shave me," he said, pausing;
and he went into the bedroom and shut the door.

"Ah," said Victoire sadly, "what a pity it is! A few years ago he would
have gone to the Crusades; and to-day he steals coronets. What a pity
it is!"

"I think myself that the best thing we can do is to pack up our
belongings," said Charolais. "And I don't think we've much time to do
it either. This particular game is at an end, you may take it from me."

"I hope to goodness it is: I want to get back to the country," said
Victoire.

He took up the tray; and they went out of the room. On the landing they
separated; she went upstairs and he went down. Presently he came up
with the shaving water and shaved his master; for in the house in
University Street he discharged the double functions of valet and
butler. He had just finished his task when there came a ring at the
front-door bell.

"You'd better go and see who it is," said Lupin.

"Bernard is answering the door," said Charolais. "But perhaps I'd
better keep an eye on it myself; one never knows."

He put away the razor leisurely, and went. On the stairs he found
Bonavent, mounting--Bonavent, disguised in the livery and fierce
moustache of a porter from the Ritz.

"Why didn't you come to the servants' entrance?" said Charolais, with
the truculent air of the servant of a duke and a stickler for his
master's dignity.

"I didn't know that there was one," said Bonavent humbly. "Well, you
ought to have known that there was; and it's plain enough to see. What
is it you want?" said Charolais.

"I've brought a letter--a letter for the Duke of Charmerace," said
Bonavent.

"Give it to me," said Charolais. "I'll take it to him."

"No, no; I'm to give it into the hands of the Duke himself and to
nobody else," said Bonavent.

"Well, in that case, you'll have to wait till he's finished dressing,"
said Charolais.

They went on up to the stairs into the ante-room. Bonavent was walking
straight into the smoking-room.

"Here! where are you going to? Wait here," said Charolais quickly.
"Take a chair; sit down."

Bonavent sat down with a very stolid air, and Charolais looked at him
doubtfully, in two minds whether to leave him there alone or not.
Before he had decided there came a thundering knock on the front door,
not only loud but protracted. Charolais looked round with a scared air;
and then ran out of the room and down the stairs.

On the instant Bonavent was on his feet, and very far from stolid. He
opened the door of the smoking-room very gently and peered in. It was
empty. He slipped noiselessly across the room, a pair of clippers ready
in his hand, and cut the wires of the telephone. His quick eye glanced
round the room and fell on the pocket-book on the table. He snatched it
up, and slipped it into the breast of his tunic. He had scarcely done
it--one button of his tunic was still to fasten--when the bedroom door
opened, and Lupin came out:

"What do you want?" he said sharply; and his keen eyes scanned the
porter with a disquieting penetration.

"I've brought a letter to the Duke of Charmerace, to be given into his
own hands," said Bonavent, in a disguised voice.

"Give it to me," said Lupin, holding out his hand.

"But the Duke?" said Bonavent, hesitating.

"I am the Duke," said Lupin.

Bonavent gave him the letter, and turned to go.

"Don't go," said Lupin quietly. "Wait, there may be an answer."

There was a faint glitter in his eyes; but Bonavent missed it.

Charolais came into the room, and said, in a grumbling tone, "A
run-away knock. I wish I could catch the brats; I'd warm them. They
wouldn't go fetching me away from my work again, in a hurry, I can tell
you."

Lupin opened the letter, and read it. As he read it, at first he
frowned; then he smiled; and then he laughed joyously. It ran:

"SIR,"

"M. Guerchard has told me everything. With regard to Sonia I have
judged you: a man who loves a thief can be nothing but a rogue. I have
two pieces of news to announce to you: the death of the Duke of
Charmerace, who died three years ago, and my intention of becoming
engaged to his cousin and heir, M. de Relzieres, who will assume the
title and the arms."

"For Mademoiselle Gournay-Martin," "Her maid, IRMA."

"She does write in shocking bad taste," said Lupin, shaking his head
sadly. "Charolais, sit down and write a letter for me."

"Me?" said Charolais.

"Yes; you. It seems to be the fashion in financial circles; and I am
bound to follow it when a lady sets it. Write me a letter," said Lupin.

Charolais went to the writing-table reluctantly, sat down, set a sheet
of paper on the blotter, took a pen in his hand, and sighed painfully.

"Ready?" said Lupin; and he dictated:

"MADEMOISELLE,"

"I have a very robust constitution, and my indisposition will very soon
be over. I shall have the honour of sending, this afternoon, my humble
wedding present to the future Madame de Relzieres."

"For Jacques de Bartut, Marquis de Relzieres, Prince of Virieux, Duke
of Charmerace."

"His butler, ARSENE."

"Shall I write Arsene?" said Charolais, in a horrified tone.

"Why not?" said Lupin. "It's your charming name, isn't it?"

Bonavent pricked up his ears, and looked at Charolais with a new
interest.

Charolais shrugged his shoulders, finished the letter, blotted it, put
it in an envelope, addressed it, and handed it to Lupin.

"Take this to Mademoiselle Gournay-Martin," said Lupin, handing it to
Bonavent.

Bonavent took the letter, turned, and had taken one step towards the
door when Lupin sprang. His arm went round the detective's neck; he
jerked him backwards off his feet, scragging him.

"Stir, and I'll break your neck!" he cried in a terrible voice; and
then he said quietly to Charolais, "Just take my pocket-book out of
this fellow's tunic."

Charolais, with deft fingers, ripped open the detective's tunic, and
took out the pocket-book.

"This is what they call Jiu-jitsu, old chap! You'll be able to teach it
to your colleagues," said Lupin. He loosed his grip on Bonavent, and
knocked him straight with a thump in the back, and sent him flying
across the room. Then he took the pocket-book from Charolais and made
sure that its contents were untouched.

"Tell your master from me that if he wants to bring me down he'd better
fire the gun himself," said Lupin contemptuously. "Show the gentleman
out, Charolais."

Bonavent staggered to the door, paused, and turned on Lupin a face
livid with fury.

"He will be here himself in ten minutes," he said.

"Many thanks for the information," said Lupin quietly.




CHAPTER XXII

THE BARGAIN


Charolais conducted the detective down the stairs and let him out of
the front door, cursing and threatening vengeance as he went. Charolais
took no notice of his words--he was the well-trained servant. He came
back upstairs, and on the landing called to Victoire and Bernard. They
came hurrying down; and the three of them went into the smoking-room.

"Now we know where we are," said Lupin, with cheerful briskness.
"Guerchard will be here in ten minutes with a warrant for my arrest.
All of you clear out."

"It won't be so precious easy. The house is watched," said Charolais.
"And I'll bet it's watched back and front."

"Well, slip out by the secret entrance. They haven't found that yet,"
said Lupin. "And meet me at the house at Passy."

Charolais and Bernard wanted no more telling; they ran to the book-case
and pressed the buttons; the book-case slid aside; the doors opened and
disclosed the lift. They stepped into it. Victoire had followed them.
She paused and said: "And you? Are you coming?"

"In an instant I shall slip out the same way," he said.

"I'll wait for him. You go on," said Victoire; and the lift went down.

Lupin went to the telephone, rang the bell, and put the receiver to his
ear.

"You've no time to waste telephoning. They may be here at any moment!"
cried Victoire anxiously.

"I must. If I don't telephone Sonia will come here. She will run right
into Guerchard's arms. Why the devil don't they answer? They must be
deaf!" And he rang the bell again.

"Let's go to her! Let's get out of here!" cried Victoire, more
anxiously. "There really isn't any time to waste."

"Go to her? But I don't know where she is. I lost my head last night,"
cried Lupin, suddenly anxious himself. "Are you there?" he shouted into
the telephone. "She's at a little hotel near the Star. ... Are you
there? ... But there are twenty hotels near the Star.... Are you there?
... Oh, I did lose my head last night. ... Are you there? Oh, hang this
telephone! Here I'm fighting with a piece of furniture. And every
second is important!"

He picked up the machine, shook it, saw that the wires were cut, and
cried furiously: "Ha! They've played the telephone trick on me! That's
Guerchard.... The swine!"

"And now you can come along!" cried Victoire.

"But that's just what I can't do!" he cried.

"But there's nothing more for you to do here, since you can no longer
telephone," said Victoire, bewildered.

Lupin caught her arm and shook her, staring into her face with
panic-stricken eyes. "But don't you understand that, since I haven't
telephoned, she'll come here?" he cried hoarsely. "Five-and-twenty
minutes past eight! At half-past eight she will start--start to come
here."

His face had suddenly grown haggard; this new fear had brought back all
the exhaustion of the night; his eyes were panic-stricken.

"But what about you?" said Victoire, wringing her hands.

"What about her?" said Lupin; and his voice thrilled with anguished
dread.

"But you'll gain nothing by destroying both of you--nothing at all."

"I prefer it," said Lupin slowly, with a suddenly stubborn air.

"But they're coming to take you," cried Victoire, gripping his arm.

"Take me?" cried Lupin, freeing himself quietly from her grip. And he
stood frowning, plunged in deep thought, weighing the chances, the
risks, seeking a plan, saving devices.

He crossed the room to the writing-table, opened a drawer, and took out
a cardboard box about eight inches square and set it on the table.

"They shall never take me alive," he said gloomily.

"Oh, hush, hush!" said Victoire. "I know very well that you're capable
of anything ... and they too--they'll destroy you. No, look you, you
must go. They won't do anything to her--a child like that--so frail.
She'll get off quite easily. You're coming, aren't you?"

"No, I'm not," said Lupin stubbornly.

"Oh, well, if you won't," said Victoire; and with an air of resolution
she went to the side of the lift-well, and pressed the buttons. The
doors closed; the book-case slid across. She sat down and folded her
arms.

"What, you're not going to stop here?" cried Lupin.

"Make me stir if you can. I'm as fond of you as she is--you know I am,"
said Victoire, and her face set stonily obstinate.

Lupin begged her to go; ordered her to go; he seized her by the
shoulder, shook her, and abused her like a pickpocket. She would not
stir. He abandoned the effort, sat down, and knitted his brow again in
profound and painful thought, working out his plan. Now and again his
eyes flashed, once or twice they twinkled. Victoire watched his face
with just the faintest hope on her own.

It was past five-and-twenty minutes to nine when the front-door bell
rang. They gazed at one another with an unspoken question on their
lips. The eyes of Victoire were scared, but in the eyes of Lupin the
light of battle was gathering.

"It's her," said Victoire under her breath.

"No," said Lupin. "It's Guerchard."

He sprang to his feet with shining eyes. His lips were curved in a
fighting smile. "The game isn't lost yet," he said in a tense, quiet
voice. "I'm going to play it to the end. I've a card or two left
still--good cards. I'm still the Duke of Charmerace." He turned to her.

"Now listen to me," he said. "Go down and open the door for him."

"What, you want me to?" said Victoire, in a shaky voice.

"Yes, I do. Listen to me carefully. When you have opened the door, slip
out of it and watch the house. Don't go too far from it. Look out for
Sonia. You'll see her coming. Stop her from entering, Victoire--stop
her from entering." He spoke coolly, but his voice shook on the last
words.

"But if Guerchard arrests me?" said Victoire.

"He won't. When he comes in, stand behind the door. He will be too
eager to get to me to stop for you. Besides, for him you don't count in
the game. Once you're out of the house, I'll hold him here for--for
half an hour. That will leave a margin. Sonia will hurry here. She
should be here in twelve minutes. Get her away to the house at Passy.
If I don't come keep her there; she's to live with you. But I shall
come."

As he spoke he was pushing her towards the door.

The bell rang again. They were at the top of the stairs.

"And suppose he does arrest me?" said Victoire breathlessly.

"Never mind, you must go all the same," said Lupin. "Don't give up
hope--trust to me. Go--go--for my sake."

"I'm going, dearie," said Victoire; and she went down the stairs
steadily, with a brave air.

He watched her half-way down the flight; then he muttered:

"If only she gets to Sonia in time."

He turned, went into the smoking-room, and shut the door. He sat
quietly down in an easy chair, lighted a cigarette, and took up a
paper. He heard the noise of the traffic in the street grow louder as
the front door was opened. There was a pause; then he heard the door
bang. There was the sound of a hasty footstep on the stairs; the door
flew open, and Guerchard bounced into the room.

He stopped short in front of the door at the sight of Lupin, quietly
reading, smoking at his ease. He had expected to find the bird flown.
He stood still, hesitating, shuffling his feet--all his doubts had
returned; and Lupin smiled at him over the lowered paper.

Guerchard pulled himself together by a violent effort, and said
jerkily, "Good-morning, Lupin."

"Good-morning, M. Guerchard," said Lupin, with an ambiguous smile and
all the air of the Duke of Charmerace.

"You were expecting me? ... I hope I haven't kept you waiting," said
Guerchard, with an air of bravado.

"No, thank you: the time has passed quite quickly. I have so much to do
in the morning always," said Lupin. "I hope you had a good night after
that unfortunate business of the coronet. That was a disaster; and so
unexpected too."

Guerchard came a few steps into the room, still hesitating:

"You've a very charming house here," he said, with a sneer.

"It's central," said Lupin carelessly. "You must please excuse me, if I
cannot receive you as I should like; but all my servants have bolted.
Those confounded detectives of yours have frightened them away."

"You needn't bother about that. I shall catch them," said Guerchard.

"If you do, I'm sure I wish you joy of them. Do, please, keep your hat
on," said Lupin with ironic politeness.

Guerchard came slowly to the middle of the room, raising his hand to
his hat, letting it fall again without taking it off. He sat down
slowly facing him, and they gazed at one another with the wary eyes of
duellists crossing swords at the beginning of a duel.

"Did you get M. Formery to sign a little warrant?" said Lupin, in a
caressing tone full of quiet mockery.

"I did," said Guerchard through his teeth.

"And have you got it on you?" said Lupin.

"I have," said Guerchard.

"Against Lupin, or against the Duke of Charmerace?" said Lupin.

"Against Lupin, called Charmerace," said Guerchard.

"Well, that ought to cover me pretty well. Why don't you arrest me?
What are you waiting for?" said Lupin. His face was entirely serene,
his eyes were careless, his tone indifferent.

"I'm not waiting for anything," said Guerchard thickly; "but it gives
me such pleasure that I wish to enjoy this minute to the utmost,
Lupin," said Guerchard; and his eyes gloated on him.

"Lupin, himself," said Lupin, smiling.

"I hardly dare believe it," said Guerchard.

"You're quite right not to," said Lupin.

"Yes, I hardly dare believe it. You alive, here at my mercy?"

"Oh, dear no, not yet," said Lupin.

"Yes," said Guerchard, in a decisive tone. "And ever so much more than
you think." He bent forwards towards him, with his hands on his knees,
and said, "Do you know where Sonia Kritchnoff is at this moment?"

"What?" said Lupin sharply.

"I ask if you know where Sonia Kritchnoff is?" said Guerchard slowly,
lingering over the words.

"Do you?" said Lupin.

"I do," said Guerchard triumphantly.

"Where is she?" said Lupin, in a tone of utter incredulity.

"In a small hotel near the Star. The hotel has a telephone; and you can
make sure," said Guerchard.

"Indeed? That's very interesting. What's the number of it?" said Lupin,
in a mocking tone.

"555 Central: would you like to telephone to her?" said Guerchard; and
he smiled triumphantly at the disabled instrument.

Lupin shock his head with a careless smile, and said, "Why should I
telephone to her? What are you driving at?"

"Nothing ... that's all," said Guerchard. And he leant back in his
chair with an ugly smile on his face.

"Evidently nothing. For, after all, what has that child got to do with
you? You're not interested in her, plainly. She's not big enough game
for you. It's me you are hunting ... it's me you hate ... it's me you
want. I've played you tricks enough for that, you old scoundrel. So
you're going to leave that child in peace? ... You're not going to
revenge yourself on her? ... It's all very well for you to be a
policeman; it's all very well for you to hate me; but there are things
one does not do." There was a ring of menace and appeal in the deep,
ringing tones of his voice. "You're not going to do that, Guerchard....
You will not do it.... Me--yes--anything you like. But her--her you
must not touch." He gazed at the detective with fierce, appealing eyes.

"That depends on you," said Guerchard curtly.

"On me?" cried Lupin, in genuine surprise.

"Yes, I've a little bargain to propose to you," said Guerchard.

"Have you?" said Lupin; and his watchful face was serene again, his
smile almost pleasant.

"Yes," said Guerchard. And he paused, hesitating.

"Well, what is it you want?" said Lupin. "Out with it! Don't be shy
about it."

"I offer you--"

"You offer me?" cried Lupin. "Then it isn't true. You're fooling me."

"Reassure yourself," said Guerchard coldly. "To you personally I offer
nothing."

"Then you are sincere," said Lupin. "And putting me out of the
question?"

"I offer you liberty."

"Who for? For my concierge?" said Lupin.

"Don't play the fool. You care only for a single person in the world. I
hold you through her: Sonia Kritchnoff."

Lupin burst into a ringing, irrepressible laugh:

"Why, you're trying to blackmail me, you old sweep!" he cried.

"If you like to call it so," said Guerchard coldly.

Lupin rose and walked backwards and forwards across the room, frowning,
calculating, glancing keenly at Guerchard, weighing him. Twice he
looked at the clock.

He stopped and said coldly: "So be it. For the moment you're the
stronger.... That won't last.... But you offer me this child's liberty."

"That's my offer," said Guerchard; and his eyes brightened at the
prospect of success.

"Her complete liberty? ... on your word of honour?" said Lupin; and he
had something of the air of a cat playing with a mouse.

"On my word of honour," said Guerchard.

"Can you do it?" said Lupin, with a sudden air of doubt; and he looked
sharply from Guerchard to the clock.

"I undertake to do it," said Guerchard confidently.

"But how?" said Lupin, looking at him with an expression of the gravest
doubt.

"Oh, I'll put the thefts on your shoulders. That will let her out all
right," said Guerchard.

"I've certainly good broad shoulders," said Lupin, with a bitter smile.
He walked slowly up and down with an air that grew more and more
depressed: it was almost the air of a beaten man. Then he stopped and
faced Guerchard, and said: "And what is it you want in exchange?"

"Everything," said Guerchard, with the air of a man who is winning.
"You must give me back the pictures, tapestry, Renaissance cabinets,
the coronet, and all the information about the death of the Duke of
Charmerace. Did you kill him?"

"If ever I commit suicide, you'll know all about it, my good Guerchard.
You'll be there. You may even join me," said Lupin grimly; he resumed
his pacing up and down the room.

"Done for, yes; I shall be done for," he said presently. "The fact is,
you want my skin."

"Yes, I want your skin," said Guerchard, in a low, savage, vindictive
tone.

"My skin," said Lupin thoughtfully.

"Are you going to do it? Think of that girl," said Guerchard, in a
fresh access of uneasy anxiety.

Lupin laughed: "I can give you a glass of port," he said, "but I'm
afraid that's all I can do for you."

"I'll throw Victoire in," said Guerchard.

"What?" cried Lupin. "You've arrested Victoire?" There was a ring of
utter dismay, almost despair, in his tone.

"Yes; and I'll throw her in. She shall go scot-free. I won't bother
with her," said Guerchard eagerly.

The front-door bell rang.

"Wait, wait. Let me think," said Lupin hoarsely; and he strove to
adjust his jostling ideas, to meet with a fresh plan this fresh
disaster.

He stood listening with all his ears. There were footsteps on the
stairs, and the door opened. Dieusy stood on the threshold.

"Who is it?" said Guerchard.

"I accept--I accept everything," cried Lupin in a frantic tone.

"It's a tradesman; am I to detain him?" said Dieusy. "You told me to
let you know who came and take instructions."

"A tradesman? Then I refuse!" cried Lupin, in an ecstasy of relief.

"No, you needn't keep him," said Guerchard, to Dieusy.

Dieusy went out and shut the door.

"You refuse?" said Guerchard.

"I refuse," said Lupin.

"I'm going to gaol that girl," said Guerchard savagely; and he took a
step towards the door.

"Not for long," said Lupin quietly. "You have no proof."

"She'll furnish the proof all right herself--plenty of proofs," said
Guerchard brutally. "What chance has a silly child like that got, when
we really start questioning her? A delicate creature like that will
crumple up before the end of the third day's cross-examination."

"You swine!" said Lupin. "You know well enough that I can do it--on my
head--with a feeble child like that; and you know your Code; five years
is the minimum," said Guerchard, in a tone of relentless brutality,
watching him carefully, sticking to his hope.

"By Jove, I could wring your neck!" said Lupin, trembling with fury. By
a violent effort he controlled himself, and said thoughtfully, "After
all, if I give up everything to you, I shall be free to take it back
one of these days."

"Oh, no doubt, when you come out of prison," said Guerchard ironically;
and he laughed a grim, jeering laugh.

"I've got to go to prison first," said Lupin quietly.

"Pardon me--if you accept, I mean to arrest you," said Guerchard.

"Manifestly you'll arrest me if you can," said Lupin.

"Do you accept?" said Guerchard. And again his voice quivered with
anxiety.

"Well," said Lupin. And he paused as if finally weighing the matter.

"Well?" said Guerchard, and his voice shook.

"Well--no!" said Lupin; and he laughed a mocking laugh.

"You won't?" said Guerchard between his teeth.

"No; you wish to catch me. This is just a ruse," said Lupin, in quiet,
measured tones. "At bottom you don't care a hang about Sonia,
Mademoiselle Kritchnoff. You will not arrest her. And then, if you did
you have no proofs. There ARE no proofs. As for the pendant, you'd have
to prove it. You can't prove it. You can't prove that it was in her
possession one moment. Where is the pendant?" He paused, and then went
on in the same quiet tone: "No, Guerchard; after having kept out of
your clutches for the last ten years, I'm not going to be caught to
save this child, who is not even in danger. She has a very useful
friend in the Duke of Charmerace. I refuse."

Guerchard stared at him, scowling, biting his lips, seeking a fresh
point of attack. For the moment he knew himself baffled, but he still
clung tenaciously to the struggle in which victory would be so precious.

The front-door bell rang again.

"There's a lot of ringing at your bell this morning," said Guerchard,
under his breath; and hope sprang afresh in him.

Again they stood silent, waiting.

Dieusy opened the door, put in his head, and said, "It's Mademoiselle
Kritchnoff."

"Collar her! ... Here's the warrant! ... collar her!" shouted
Guerchard, with savage, triumphant joy.

"Never! You shan't touch her! By Heaven, you shan't touch her!" cried
Lupin frantically; and he sprang like a tiger at Guerchard.

Guerchard jumped to the other side of the table. "Will you accept,
then?" he cried.

Lupin gripped the edge of the table with both hands, and stood panting,
grinding his teeth, pale with fury. He stood silent and motionless for
perhaps half a minute, gazing at Guerchard with burning, murderous
eyes. Then he nodded his head.

"Let Mademoiselle Kritchnoff wait," said Guerchard, with a sigh of deep
relief. Dieusy went out of the room.

"Now let us settle exactly how we stand," said Lupin, in a clear,
incisive voice. "The bargain is this: If I give you the pictures, the
tapestry, the cabinets, the coronet, and the death-certificate of the
Duke of Charmerace, you give me your word of honour that Mademoiselle
Kritchnoff shall not be touched."

"That's it!" said Guerchard eagerly.

"Once I deliver these things to you, Mademoiselle Kritchnoff passes out
of the game."

"Yes," said Guerchard.

"Whatever happens afterwards. If I get back anything--if I escape--she
goes scot-free," said Lupin.

"Yes," said Guerchard; and his eyes were shining.

"On your word of honour?" said Lupin.

"On my word of honour," said Guerchard.

"Very well," said Lupin, in a quiet, businesslike voice. "To begin
with, here in this pocket-book you'll find all the documents relating
to the death of the Duke of Charmerace. In it you will also find the
receipt of the Plantin furniture repository at Batignolles for the
objects of art which I collected at Gournay-Martin's. I sent them to
Batignolles because, in my letters asking the owners of valuables to
forward them to me, I always make Batignolles the place to which they
are to be sent; therefore I knew that you would never look there. They
are all in cases; for, while you were making those valuable inquiries
yesterday, my men were putting them into cases. You'll not find the
receipt in the name of either the Duke of Charmerace or my own. It is
in the name of a respected proprietor of Batignolles, a M. Pierre
Servien. But he has lately left that charming suburb, and I do not
think he will return to it."

Guerchard almost snatched the pocket-book out of his hand. He verified
the documents in it with greedy eyes; and then he put them back in it,
and stuffed it into the breast-pocket of his coat.

"And where's the coronet?" he said, in an excited voice.

"You're nearly standing on it," said Lupin.

"It's in that kit-bag at your feet, on the top of the change of clothes
in it."

Guerchard snatched up the kit-bag, opened it, and took out the coronet.

"I'm afraid I haven't the case," said Lupin, in a tone of regret. "If
you remember, I left it at Gournay-Martin's--in your charge."

Guerchard examined the coronet carefully. He looked at the stones in
it; he weighed it in his right hand, and he weighed it in his left.

"Are you sure it's the real one?" said Lupin, in a tone of acute but
affected anxiety. "Do not--oh, do not let us have any more of these
painful mistakes about it. They are so wearing."

"Yes--yes--this is the real one," said Guerchard, with another deep
sigh of relief.

"Well, have you done bleeding me?" said Lupin contemptuously.

"Your arms," said Guerchard quickly.

"They weren't in the bond," said Lupin. "But here you are." And he
threw his revolver on the table.

Guerchard picked it up and put it into his pocket. He looked at Lupin
as if he could not believe his eyes, gloating over him. Then he said in
a deep, triumphant tone:

"And now for the handcuffs!"




CHAPTER XXIII

THE END OF THE DUEL


"The handcuffs?" said Lupin; and his face fell. Then it cleared; and he
added lightly, "After all, there's nothing like being careful; and, by
Jove, with me you need to be. I might get away yet. What luck it is for
you that I'm so soft, so little of a Charmerace, so human! Truly, I
can't be much of a man of the world, to be in love like this!"

"Come, come, hold out your hands!" said Guerchard, jingling the
handcuffs impatiently.

"I should like to see that child for the last time," said Lupin gently.

"All right," said Guerchard.

"Arsene Lupin--and nabbed by you! If you aren't in luck! Here you are!"
said Lupin bitterly; and he held out his wrists.

Guerchard snapped the handcuffs on them with a grunt of satisfaction.

Lupin gazed down at them with a bitter face, and said: "Oh, you are in
luck! You're not married by any chance?"

"Yes, yes; I am," said Guerchard hastily; and he went quickly to the
door and opened it: "Dieusy!" he called. "Dieusy! Mademoiselle
Kritchnoff is at liberty. Tell her so, and bring her in here."

Lupin started back, flushed and scowling; he cried: "With these things
on my hands! ... No! ... I can't see her!"

Guerchard stood still, looking at him. Lupin's scowl slowly softened,
and he said, half to himself, "But I should have liked to see her ...
very much ... for if she goes like that ... I shall not know when or
where--" He stopped short, raised his eyes, and said in a decided tone:
"Ah, well, yes; I should like to see her."

"If you've quite made up your mind," said Guerchard impatiently, and he
went into the anteroom.

Lupin stood very still, frowning thoughtfully. He heard footsteps on
the stairs, and then the voice of Guerchard in the anteroom, saying, in
a jeering tone, "You're free, mademoiselle; and you can thank the Duke
for it. You owe your liberty to him."

"Free! And I owe it to him?" cried the voice of Sonia, ringing and
golden with extravagant joy.

"Yes, mademoiselle," said Guerchard. "You owe it to him."

She came through the open door, flushed deliciously and smiling, her
eyes brimming with tears of joy. Lupin had never seen her look half so
adorable.

"Is it to you I owe it? Then I shall owe everything to you. Oh, thank
you--thank you!" she cried, holding out her hands to him.

Lupin half turned away from her to hide his handcuffs.

She misunderstood the movement. Her face fell suddenly like that of a
child rebuked: "Oh, I was wrong. I was wrong to come here!" she cried
quickly, in changed, dolorous tones. "I thought yesterday ... I made a
mistake ... pardon me. I'm going. I'm going."

Lupin was looking at her over his shoulder, standing sideways to hide
the handcuffs. He said sadly. "Sonia--"

"No, no, I understand! It was impossible!" she cried quickly, cutting
him short. "And yet if you only knew--if you knew how I have
changed--with what a changed spirit I came here.... Ah, I swear that
now I hate all my past. I loathe it. I swear that now the mere presence
of a thief would overwhelm me with disgust."

"Hush!" said Lupin, flushing deeply, and wincing. "Hush!"

"But, after all, you're right," she said, in a gentler voice. "One
can't wipe out what one has done. If I were to give back everything
I've taken--if I were to spend years in remorse and repentance, it
would be no use. In your eyes I should always be Sonia Kritchnoff, the
thief!" The great tears welled slowly out of her eyes and rolled down
her cheeks; she let them stream unheeded.

"Sonia!" cried Lupin, protesting.

But she would not hear him. She broke out with fresh vehemence, a
feverish passion: "And yet, if I'd been a thief, like so many others...
but you know why I stole. I'm not trying to defend myself, but, after
all, I did it to keep honest; and when I loved you it was not the heart
of a thief that thrilled, it was the heart of a poor girl who
loved...that's all...who loved."

"You don't know what you're doing! You're torturing me! Be quiet!"
cried Lupin hoarsely, beside himself.

"Never mind...I'm going...we shall never see one another any more," she
sobbed. "But will you...will you shake hands just for the last time?"

"No!" cried Lupin.

"You won't?" wailed Sonia in a heartrending tone.

"I can't!" cried Lupin.

"You ought not to be like this.... Last night ... if you were going to
let me go like this ... last night ... it was wrong," she wailed, and
turned to go.

"Wait, Sonia! Wait!" cried Lupin hoarsely. "A moment ago you said
something.... You said that the mere presence of a thief would
overwhelm you with disgust. Is that true?"

"Yes, I swear it is," cried Sonia.

Guerchard appeared in the doorway.

"And if I were not the man you believe?" said Lupin sombrely.

"What?" said Sonia; and a faint bewilderment mingled with her grief.
"If I were not the Duke of Charmerace?"

"Not the Duke?"

"If I were not an honest man?" said Lupin.

"You?" cried Sonia.

"If I were a thief? If I were--"

"Arsene Lupin," jeered Guerchard from the door.

Lupin turned and held out his manacled wrists for her to see.

"Arsene Lupin! ... it's ... it's true!" stammered Sonia. "But then, but
then ... it must be for my sake that you've given yourself up. And it's
for me you're going to prison. Oh, Heavens! How happy I am!"

She sprang to him, threw her arms round his neck, and pressed her lips
to his.

"And that's what women call repenting," said Guerchard.

He shrugged his shoulders, went out on to the landing, and called to
the policeman in the hall to bid the driver of the prison-van, which
was waiting, bring it up to the door.

"Oh, this is incredible!" cried Lupin, in a trembling voice; and he
kissed Sonia's lips and eyes and hair. "To think that you love me
enough to go on loving me in spite of this--in spite of the fact that
I'm Arsene Lupin. Oh, after this, I'll become an honest man! It's the
least I can do. I'll retire."

"You will?" cried Sonia.

"Upon my soul, I will!" cried Lupin; and he kissed her again and again.

Guerchard came back into the room. He looked at them with a cynical
grin, and said, "Time's up."

"Oh, Guerchard, after so many others, I owe you the best minute of my
life!" cried Lupin.

Bonavent, still in his porter's livery, came hurrying through the
anteroom: "Master," he cried, "I've found it."

"Found what?" said Guerchard.

"The secret entrance. It opens into that little side street. We haven't
got the door open yet; but we soon shall."

"The last link in the chain," said Guerchard, with warm satisfaction.
"Come along, Lupin."

"But he's going to take you away! We're going to be separated!" cried
Sonia, in a sudden anguish of realization.

"It's all the same to me now!" cried Lupin, in the voice of a conqueror.

"Yes, but not to me!" cried Sonia, wringing her hands.

"Now you must keep calm and go. I'm not going to prison," said Lupin,
in a low voice. "Wait in the hall, if you can. Stop and talk to
Victoire; condole with her. If they turn you out of the house, wait
close to the front door."

"Come, mademoiselle," said Guerchard. "You must go."

"Go, Sonia, go--good-bye--good-bye," said Lupin; and he kissed her.

She went quietly out of the room, her handkerchief to her eyes.
Guerchard held open the door for her, and kept it open, with his hand
still on the handle; he said to Lupin: "Come along."

Lupin yawned, stretched himself, and said coolly, "My dear Guerchard,
what I want after the last two nights is rest--rest." He walked quickly
across the room and stretched himself comfortably at full length on the
couch.

"Come, get up," said Guerchard roughly. "The prison-van is waiting for
you. That ought to fetch you out of your dream."

"Really, you do say the most unlucky things," said Lupin gaily.

He had resumed his flippant, light-hearted air; his voice rang as
lightly and pleasantly as if he had not a care in the world.

"Do you mean that you refuse to come?" cried Guerchard in a rough,
threatening tone.

"Oh, no," said Lupin quickly: and he rose.

"Then come along!" said Guerchard.

"No," said Lupin, "after all, it's too early." Once more he stretched
himself out on the couch, and added languidly, "I'm lunching at the
English Embassy."

"Now, you be careful!" cried Guerchard angrily. "Our parts are changed.
If you're snatching at a last straw, it's waste of time. All your
tricks--I know them. Understand, you rogue, I know them."

"You know them?" said Lupin with a smile, rising. "It's fatality!"

He stood before Guerchard, twisting his hands and wrists curiously.
Half a dozen swift movements; and he held out his handcuffs in one hand
and threw them on the floor.

"Did you know that trick, Guerchard? One of these days I shall teach
you to invite me to lunch," he said slowly, in a mocking tone; and he
gazed at the detective with menacing, dangerous eyes.

"Come, come, we've had enough of this!" cried Guerchard, in mingled
astonishment, anger, and alarm. "Bonavent! Boursin! Dieusy! Here! Help!
Help!" he shouted.

"Now listen, Guerchard, and understand that I'm not humbugging," said
Lupin quickly, in clear, compelling tones. "If Sonia, just now, had had
one word, one gesture of contempt for me, I'd have given way--yielded
... half-yielded, at any rate; for, rather than fall into your
triumphant clutches, I'd have blown my brains out. I've now to choose
between happiness, life with Sonia, or prison. Well, I've chosen. I
will live happy with her, or else, my dear Guerchard, I'll die with
you. Now let your men come--I'm ready for them."

Guerchard ran to the door and shouted again.

"I think the fat's in the fire now," said Lupin, laughing.

He sprang to the table, opened the cardboard box, whipped off the top
layer of cotton-wool, and took out a shining bomb.

He sprang to the wall, pressed the button, the bookshelf glided slowly
to one side, the lift rose to the level of the floor and its doors flew
open just as the detectives rushed in.

"Collar him!" yelled Guerchard.

"Stand back--hands up!" cried Lupin, in a terrible voice, raising his
right hand high above his head. "You know what this is ... a bomb....
Come and collar me now, you swine! ... Hands up, you ... Guerchard!"

"You silly funks!" roared Guerchard. "Do you think he'd dare?"

"Come and see!" cried Lupin.

"I will!" cried Guerchard. And he took a step forward.

As one man his detectives threw themselves upon him. Three of them
gripped his arms, a fourth gripped him round the waist; and they all
shouted at him together, not to be a madman! ... To look at Lupin's
eyes! ... That Lupin was off his head!

"What miserable swine you are!" cried Lupin scornfully. He sprang
forward, caught up the kit-bag in his left hand, and tossed it behind
him into the lift. "You dirty crew!" he cried again. "Oh, why isn't
there a photographer here? And now, Guerchard, you thief, give me back
my pocket-book."

"Never!" screamed Guerchard, struggling with his men, purple with fury.

"Oh, Lord, master! Do be careful! Don't rile him!" cried Bonavent in an
agony.

"What? Do you want me to smash up the whole lot?" roared Lupin, in a
furious, terrible voice. "Do I look as if I were bluffing, you fools?"

"Let him have his way, master!" cried Dieusy.

"Yes, yes!" cried Bonavent.

"Let him have his way!" cried another.

"Give him his pocket-book!" cried a third.

"Never!" howled Guerchard.

"It's in his pocket--his breast-pocket! Be smart!" roared Lupin.

"Come, come, it's got to be given to him," cried Bonavent. "Hold the
master tight!" And he thrust his hand into the breast of Guerchard's
coat, and tore out the pocket-book.

"Throw it on the table!" cried Lupin.

Bonavent threw it on to the table; and it slid along it right to Lupin.
He caught it in his left hand, and slipped it into his pocket. "Good!"
he said. And then he yelled ferociously, "Look out for the bomb!" and
made a feint of throwing it.

The whole group fell back with an odd, unanimous, sighing groan.

Lupin sprang into the lift, and the doors closed over the opening.
There was a great sigh of relief from the frightened detectives, and
then the chunking of machinery as the lift sank.

Their grip on Guerchard loosened. He shook himself free, and shouted,
"After him! You've got to make up for this! Down into the cellars, some
of you! Others go to the secret entrance! Others to the servants'
entrance! Get into the street! Be smart! Dieusy, take the lift with me!"

The others ran out of the room and down the stairs, but with no great
heartiness, since their minds were still quite full of the bomb, and
Lupin still had it with him. Guerchard and Dieusy dashed at the doors
of the opening of the lift-well, pulling and wrenching at them.
Suddenly there was a click; and they heard the grunting of the
machinery. There was a little bump and a jerk, the doors flew open of
themselves; and there was the lift, empty, ready for them. They jumped
into it; Guerchard's quick eye caught the button, and he pressed it.
The doors banged to, and, to his horror, the lift shot upwards about
eight feet, and stuck between the floors.

As the lift stuck, a second compartment, exactly like the one Guerchard
and Dieusy were in, came up to the level of the floor of the
smoking-room; the doors opened, and there was Lupin. But again how
changed! The clothes of the Duke of Charmerace littered the floor; the
kit-bag was open; and he was wearing the very clothes of
Chief-Inspector Guerchard, his seedy top-hat, his cloak. He wore also
Guerchard's sparse, lank, black hair, his little, bristling, black
moustache. His figure, hidden by the cloak, seemed to have shrunk to
the size of Guerchard's.

He sat before a mirror in the wall of the lift, a make-up box on the
seat beside him. He darkened his eyebrows, and put a line or two about
his eyes. That done he looked at himself earnestly for two or three
minutes; and, as he looked, a truly marvellous transformation took
place: the features of Arsene Lupin, of the Duke of Charmerace,
decomposed, actually decomposed, into the features of Jean Guerchard.
He looked at himself and laughed, the gentle, husky laugh of Guerchard.

He rose, transferred the pocket-book to the coat he was wearing, picked
up the bomb, came out into the smoking-room, and listened. A muffled
roaring thumping came from the well of the lift. It almost sounded as
if, in their exasperation, Guerchard and Dieusy were engaged in a
struggle to the death. Smiling pleasantly, he stole to the window and
looked out. His eyes brightened at the sight of the motor-car,
Guerchard's car, waiting just before the front door and in charge of a
policeman. He stole to the head of the stairs, and looked down into the
hall. Victoire was sitting huddled together on a chair; Sonia stood
beside her, talking to her in a low voice; and, keeping guard on
Victoire, stood a brown-faced, active, nervous policeman, all
alertness, briskness, keenness.

"Hi! officer! come up here! Be smart," cried Lupin over the bannisters,
in the husky, gentle voice of Chief-Inspector Guerchard.

The policeman looked up, recognized the great detective, and came
bounding zealously up the stairs.

Lupin led the way through the anteroom into the sitting-room. Then he
said sharply: "You have your revolver?"

"Yes," said the young policeman. And he drew it with a flourish.

"Put it away! Put it away at once!" said Lupin very smartly. "You're
not to use it. You're not to use it on any account! You understand?"

"Yes," said the policeman firmly; and with a slightly bewildered air he
put the revolver away.

"Here! Stand here!" cried Lupin, raising his voice. And he caught the
policeman's arm, and hustled him roughly to the front of the doors of
the lift-well. "Do you see these doors? Do you see them?" he snapped.

"Yes, yes," said the policeman, glaring at them.

"They're the doors of a lift," said Lupin. "In that lift are Dieusy and
Lupin. You know Dieusy?"

"Yes, yes," said the policeman.

"There are only Dieusy and Lupin in the lift. They are struggling
together. You can hear them," shouted Lupin in the policeman's ear.
"Lupin is disguised. You understand--Dieusy and a disguised man are in
the lift. The disguised man is Lupin. Directly the lift descends and
the doors open, throw yourself on him! Hold him! Shout for assistance!"
He almost bellowed the last words into the policeman's ear.

"Yes, yes," said the policeman. And he braced himself before the doors
of the lift-well, gazing at them with harried eyes, as if he expected
them to bite him.

"Be brave! Be ready to die in the discharge of your duty!" bellowed
Lupin; and he walked out of the room, shut the door, and turned the key.

The policeman stood listening to the noise of the struggle in the lift,
himself strung up to fighting point; he was panting. Lupin's
instructions were whirling and dancing in his head.

Lupin went quietly down the stairs. Victoire and Sonia saw him coming.
Victoire rose; and as he came to the bottom of the stairs Sonia stepped
forward and said in an anxious, pleading voice:

"Oh, M. Guerchard, where is he?"

"He's here," said Lupin, in his natural voice.

Sonia sprang to him with outstretched arms.

"It's you! It IS you!" she cried.

"Just look how like him I am!" said Lupin, laughing triumphantly. "But
do I look quite ruffian enough?"

"Oh, NO! You couldn't!" cried Sonia.

"Isn't he a wonder?" said Victoire.

"This time the Duke of Charmerace is dead, for good and all," said
Lupin.

"No; it's Lupin that's dead," said Sonia softly.

"Lupin?" he said, surprised.

"Yes," said Sonia firmly.

"It would be a terrible loss, you know--a loss for France," said Lupin
gravely.

"Never mind," said Sonia.

"Oh, I must be in love with you!" said Lupin, in a wondering tone; and
he put his arm round her and kissed her violently.

"And you won't steal any more?" said Sonia, holding him back with both
hands on his shoulders, looking into his eyes.

"I shouldn't dream of such a thing," said Lupin. "You are here.
Guerchard is in the lift. What more could I possibly desire?" His voice
softened and grew infinitely caressing as he went on: "Yet when you are
at my side I shall always have the soul of a lover and the soul of a
thief. I long to steal your kisses, your thoughts, the whole of your
heart. Ah, Sonia, if you want me to steal nothing else, you have only
to stay by my side."

Their lips met in a long kiss.

Sonia drew herself out of his arms and cried, "But we're wasting time!
We must make haste! We must fly!"

"Fly?" said Lupin sharply. "No, thank you; never again. I did flying
enough last night to last me a lifetime. For the rest of my life I'm
going to crawl--crawl like a snail. But come along, you two, I must
take you to the police-station."

He opened the front door, and they came out on the steps. The policeman
in charge of the car saluted.

Lupin paused and said softly: "Hark! I hear the sound of wedding bells."

They went down the steps.

Even as they were getting into the car some chance blow of Guerchard or
Dieusy struck a hidden spring and released the lift. It sank to the
level of Lupin's smoking-room and stopped. The doors flew open, Dieusy
and Guerchard sprang out of it; and on the instant the brown-faced,
nervous policeman sprang actively on Guerchard and pinned him. Taken by
surprise, Guerchard yelled loudly, "You stupid idiot!" somehow
entangled his legs in those of his captor, and they rolled on the
floor. Dieusy surveyed them for a moment with blank astonishment. Then,
with swift intelligence, grasped the fact that the policeman was Lupin
in disguise. He sprang upon them, tore them asunder, fell heavily on
the policeman, and pinned him to the floor with a strangling hand on
his throat.

Guerchard dashed to the door, tried it, and found it locked, dashed for
the window, threw it open, and thrust out his head. Forty yards down
the street a motor-car was rolling smoothly away--rolling to a
honeymoon.

"Oh, hang it!" he screamed. "He's doing a bunk in my motor-car!"




THE IDES OF MARCH

I

It was half-past twelve when I returned to the Albany as a last
desperate resort.  The scene of my disaster was much as I had left it.
The baccarat-counters still strewed the table, with the empty glasses
and the loaded ash-trays.  A window had been opened to let the smoke
out, and was letting in the fog instead.  Raffles himself had merely
discarded his dining jacket for one of his innumerable blazers.  Yet he
arched his eyebrows as though I had dragged him from his bed.

"Forgotten something?" said he, when he saw me on his mat.

"No," said I, pushing past him without ceremony.  And I led the way
into his room with an impudence amazing to myself.

"Not come back for your revenge, have you?  Because I'm afraid I can't
give it to you single-handed.  I was sorry myself that the others--"

We were face to face by his fireside, and I cut him short.

"Raffles," said I, "you may well be surprised at my coming back in this
way and at this hour.  I hardly know you.  I was never in your rooms
before to-night.  But I fagged for you at school, and you said you
remembered me.  Of course that's no excuse; but will you listen to
me--for two minutes?"

In my emotion I had at first to struggle for every word; but his face
reassured me as I went on, and I was not mistaken in its expression.

"Certainly, my dear man," said he; "as many minutes as you like.  Have
a Sullivan and sit down."  And he handed me his silver cigarette-case.

"No," said I, finding a full voice as I shook my head; "no, I won't
smoke, and I won't sit down, thank you.  Nor will you ask me to do
either when you've heard what I have to say."

"Really?" said he, lighting his own cigarette with one clear blue eye
upon me.  "How do you know?"

"Because you'll probably show me the door," I cried bitterly; "and you
will be justified in doing it!  But it's no use beating about the bush.
You know I dropped over two hundred just now?"

He nodded.

"I hadn't the money in my pocket."

"I remember."

"But I had my check-book, and I wrote each of you a check at that desk."

"Well?"

"Not one of them was worth the paper it was written on, Raffles.  I am
overdrawn already at my bank!"

"Surely only for the moment?"

"No.  I have spent everything."

"But somebody told me you were so well off. I heard you had come in for
money?"

"So I did.  Three years ago.  It has been my curse; now it's all
gone--every penny!  Yes, I've been a fool; there never was nor will be
such a fool as I've been....  Isn't this enough for you?  Why don't you
turn me out?"  He was walking up and down with a very long face instead.

"Couldn't your people do anything?" he asked at length.

"Thank God," I cried, "I have no people!  I was an only child.  I came
in for everything there was.  My one comfort is that they're gone, and
will never know."

I cast myself into a chair and hid my face. Raffles continued to pace
the rich carpet that was of a piece with everything else in his rooms.
There was no variation in his soft and even footfalls.

"You used to be a literary little cuss," he said at length; "didn't you
edit the mag. before you left?  Anyway I recollect fagging you to do my
verses; and literature of all sorts is the very thing nowadays; any
fool can make a living at it."

I shook my head.  "Any fool couldn't write off my debts," said I.

"Then you have a flat somewhere?" he went on.

"Yes, in Mount Street."

"Well, what about the furniture?"

I laughed aloud in my misery.  "There's been a bill of sale on every
stick for months!"

And at that Raffles stood still, with raised eyebrows and stern eyes
that I could meet the better now that he knew the worst; then, with a
shrug, he resumed his walk, and for some minutes neither of us spoke.
But in his handsome, unmoved face I read my fate and death-warrant; and
with every breath I cursed my folly and my cowardice in coming to him
at all.  Because he had been kind to me at school, when he was captain
of the eleven, and I his fag, I had dared to look for kindness from him
now; because I was ruined, and he rich enough to play cricket all the
summer, and do nothing for the rest of the year, I had fatuously
counted on his mercy, his sympathy, his help!  Yes, I had relied on him
in my heart, for all my outward diffidence and humility; and I was
rightly served.  There was as little of mercy as of sympathy in that
curling nostril, that rigid jaw, that cold blue eye which never glanced
my way.  I caught up my hat.  I blundered to my feet.  I would have
gone without a word; but Raffles stood between me and the door.

"Where are you going?" said he.

"That's my business," I replied.  "I won't trouble YOU any more."

"Then how am I to help you?"

"I didn't ask your help."

"Then why come to me?"

"Why, indeed!" I echoed.  "Will you let me pass?"

"Not until you tell me where you are going and what you mean to do."

"Can't you guess?" I cried.  And for many seconds we stood staring in
each other's eyes.

"Have you got the pluck?" said he, breaking the spell in a tone so
cynical that it brought my last drop of blood to the boil.

"You shall see," said I, as I stepped back and whipped the pistol from
my overcoat pocket. "Now, will you let me pass or shall I do it here?"

The barrel touched my temple, and my thumb the trigger.  Mad with
excitement as I was, ruined, dishonored, and now finally determined to
make an end of my misspent life, my only surprise to this day is that I
did not do so then and there. The despicable satisfaction of involving
another in one's destruction added its miserable appeal to my baser
egoism; and had fear or horror flown to my companion's face, I shudder
to think I might have died diabolically happy with that look for my
last impious consolation.  It was the look that came instead which held
my hand.  Neither fear nor horror were in it; only wonder, admiration,
and such a measure of pleased expectancy as caused me after all to
pocket my revolver with an oath.

"You devil!" I said.  "I believe you wanted me to do it!"

"Not quite," was the reply, made with a little start, and a change of
color that came too late. "To tell you the truth, though, I half
thought you meant it, and I was never more fascinated in my life.  I
never dreamt you had such stuff in you, Bunny!  No, I'm hanged if I let
you go now.  And you'd better not try that game again, for you won't
catch me stand and look on a second time.  We must think of some way
out of the mess.  I had no idea you were a chap of that sort!  There,
let me have the gun."

One of his hands fell kindly on my shoulder, while the other slipped
into my overcoat pocket, and I suffered him to deprive me of my weapon
without a murmur.  Nor was this simply because Raffles had the subtle
power of making himself irresistible at will.  He was beyond comparison
the most masterful man whom I have ever known; yet my acquiescence was
due to more than the mere subjection of the weaker nature to the
stronger. The forlorn hope which had brought me to the Albany was
turned as by magic into an almost staggering sense of safety.  Raffles
would help me after all!  A. J. Raffles would be my friend!  It was as
though all the world had come round suddenly to my side; so far
therefore from resisting his action, I caught and clasped his hand with
a fervor as uncontrollable as the frenzy which had preceded it.

"God bless you!" I cried.  "Forgive me for everything.  I will tell you
the truth.  I DID think you might help me in my extremity, though I
well knew that I had no claim upon you.  Still--for the old school's
sake--the sake of old times--I thought you might give me another
chance.  If you wouldn't I meant to blow out my brains--and will still
if you change your mind!"

In truth I feared that it was changing, with his expression, even as I
spoke, and in spite of his kindly tone and kindlier use of my old
school nickname.  His next words showed me my mistake.

"What a boy it is for jumping to conclusions! I have my vices, Bunny,
but backing and filling is not one of them.  Sit down, my good fellow,
and have a cigarette to soothe your nerves.  I insist.  Whiskey?  The
worst thing for you; here's some coffee that I was brewing when you
came in.  Now listen to me.  You speak of 'another chance.'  What do
you mean?  Another chance at baccarat?  Not if I know it!  You think
the luck must turn; suppose it didn't?  We should only have made bad
worse.  No, my dear chap, you've plunged enough. Do you put yourself in
my hands or do you not? Very well, then you plunge no more, and I
undertake not to present my check.  Unfortunately there are the other
men; and still more unfortunately, Bunny, I'm as hard up at this moment
as you are yourself!"

It was my turn to stare at Raffles.  "You?" I vociferated.  "You hard
up?  How am I to sit here and believe that?"

"Did I refuse to believe it of you?" he returned, smiling.  "And, with
your own experience, do you think that because a fellow has rooms in
this place, and belongs to a club or two, and plays a little cricket,
he must necessarily have a balance at the bank?  I tell you, my dear
man, that at this moment I'm as hard up as you ever were.  I have
nothing but my wits to live on--absolutely nothing else. It was as
necessary for me to win some money this evening as it was for you.
We're in the same boat, Bunny; we'd better pull together."

"Together!"  I jumped at it.  "I'll do anything in this world for you,
Raffles," I said, "if you really mean that you won't give me away.
Think of anything you like, and I'll do it!  I was a desperate man when
I came here, and I'm just as desperate now.  I don't mind what I do if
only I can get out of this without a scandal."

Again I see him, leaning back in one of the luxurious chairs with which
his room was furnished. I see his indolent, athletic figure; his pale,
sharp, clean-shaven features; his curly black hair; his strong,
unscrupulous mouth.  And again I feel the clear beam of his wonderful
eye, cold and luminous as a star, shining into my brain--sifting the
very secrets of my heart.

"I wonder if you mean all that!" he said at length.  "You do in your
present mood; but who can back his mood to last?  Still, there's hope
when a chap takes that tone.  Now I think of it, too, you were a plucky
little devil at school; you once did me rather a good turn, I
recollect.  Remember it, Bunny?  Well, wait a bit, and perhaps I'll be
able to do you a better one.  Give me time to think."

He got up, lit a fresh cigarette, and fell to pacing the room once
more, but with a slower and more thoughtful step, and for a much longer
period than before.  Twice he stopped at my chair as though on the
point of speaking, but each time he checked himself and resumed his
stride in silence.  Once he threw up the window, which he had shut some
time since, and stood for some moments leaning out into the fog which
filled the Albany courtyard.  Meanwhile a clock on the chimney-piece
struck one, and one again for the half-hour, without a word between us.

Yet I not only kept my chair with patience, but I acquired an
incongruous equanimity in that half-hour.  Insensibly I had shifted my
burden to the broad shoulders of this splendid friend, and my thoughts
wandered with my eyes as the minutes passed.  The room was the
good-sized, square one, with the folding doors, the marble
mantel-piece, and the gloomy, old-fashioned distinction peculiar to the
Albany.  It was charmingly furnished and arranged, with the right
amount of negligence and the right amount of taste.  What struck me
most, however, was the absence of the usual insignia of a cricketer's
den.  Instead of the conventional rack of war-worn bats, a carved oak
bookcase, with every shelf in a litter, filled the better part of one
wall; and where I looked for cricketing groups, I found reproductions
of such works as "Love and Death" and "The Blessed Damozel," in dusty
frames and different parallels.  The man might have been a minor poet
instead of an athlete of the first water.  But there had always been a
fine streak of aestheticism in his complex composition; some of these
very pictures I had myself dusted in his study at school; and they set
me thinking of yet another of his many sides--and of the little
incident to which he had just referred.

Everybody knows how largely the tone of a public school depends on that
of the eleven, and on the character of the captain of cricket in
particular; and I have never heard it denied that in A. J. Raffles's
time our tone was good, or that such influence as he troubled to exert
was on the side of the angels.  Yet it was whispered in the school that
he was in the habit of parading the town at night in loud checks and a
false beard.  It was whispered, and disbelieved.  I alone knew it for a
fact; for night after night had I pulled the rope up after him when the
rest of the dormitory were asleep, and kept awake by the hour to let it
down again on a given signal.  Well, one night he was over-bold, and
within an ace of ignominious expulsion in the hey-day of his fame.
Consummate daring and extraordinary nerve on his part, aided,
doubtless, by some little presence of mind on mine, averted the
untoward result; and no more need be said of a discreditable incident.
But I cannot pretend to have forgotten it in throwing myself on this
man's mercy in my desperation.  And I was wondering how much of his
leniency was owing to the fact that Raffles had not forgotten it
either, when he stopped and stood over my chair once more.

"I've been thinking of that night we had the narrow squeak," he began.
"Why do you start?"

"I was thinking of it too."

He smiled, as though he had read my thoughts.

"Well, you were the right sort of little beggar then, Bunny; you didn't
talk and you didn't flinch. You asked no questions and you told no
tales.  I wonder if you're like that now?"

"I don't know," said I, slightly puzzled by his tone.  "I've made such
a mess of my own affairs that I trust myself about as little as I'm
likely to be trusted by anybody else.  Yet I never in my life went back
on a friend.  I will say that, otherwise perhaps I mightn't be in such
a hole to-night."

"Exactly," said Raffles, nodding to himself, as though in assent to
some hidden train of thought; "exactly what I remember of you, and I'll
bet it's as true now as it was ten years ago.  We don't alter, Bunny.
We only develop.  I suppose neither you nor I are really altered since
you used to let down that rope and I used to come up it hand over hand.
You would stick at nothing for a pal--what?"

"At nothing in this world," I was pleased to cry.

"Not even at a crime?" said Raffles, smiling.

I stopped to think, for his tone had changed, and I felt sure he was
chaffing me.  Yet his eye seemed as much in earnest as ever, and for my
part I was in no mood for reservations.

"No, not even at that," I declared; "name your crime, and I'm your man."

He looked at me one moment in wonder, and another moment in doubt; then
turned the matter off with a shake of his head, and the little cynical
laugh that was all his own.

"You're a nice chap, Bunny!  A real desperate character--what?  Suicide
one moment, and any crime I like the next!  What you want is a drag, my
boy, and you did well to come to a decent law-abiding citizen with a
reputation to lose.  None the less we must have that money to-night--by
hook or crook."

"To-night, Raffles?"

"The sooner the better.  Every hour after ten o'clock to-morrow morning
is an hour of risk.  Let one of those checks get round to your own
bank, and you and it are dishonored together.  No, we must raise the
wind to-night and re-open your account first thing to-morrow.  And I
rather think I know where the wind can be raised."

"At two o'clock in the morning?"

"Yes."

"But how--but where--at such an hour?"

"From a friend of mine here in Bond Street."

"He must be a very intimate friend!"

"Intimate's not the word.  I have the run of his place and a latch-key
all to myself."

"You would knock him up at this hour of the night?"

"If he's in bed."

"And it's essential that I should go in with you?"

"Absolutely."

"Then I must; but I'm bound to say I don't like the idea, Raffles."

"Do you prefer the alternative?" asked my companion, with a sneer.
"No, hang it, that's unfair!" he cried apologetically in the same
breath.  "I quite understand.  It's a beastly ordeal.  But it would
never do for you to stay outside.  I tell you what, you shall have a
peg before we start--just one.  There's the whiskey, here's a syphon,
and I'll be putting on an overcoat while you help yourself."

Well, I daresay I did so with some freedom, for this plan of his was
not the less distasteful to me from its apparent inevitability.  I must
own, however, that it possessed fewer terrors before my glass was
empty.  Meanwhile Raffles rejoined me, with a covert coat over his
blazer, and a soft felt hat set carelessly on the curly head he shook
with a smile as I passed him the decanter.

"When we come back," said he.  "Work first, play afterward.  Do you see
what day it is?" he added, tearing a leaflet from a Shakespearian
calendar, as I drained my glass.  "March 15th.  'The Ides of March, the
Ides of March, remember.' Eh, Bunny, my boy?  You won't forget them,
will you?"

And, with a laugh, he threw some coals on the fire before turning down
the gas like a careful householder.  So we went out together as the
clock on the chimney-piece was striking two.


II

Piccadilly was a trench of raw white fog, rimmed with blurred
street-lamps, and lined with a thin coating of adhesive mud.  We met no
other wayfarers on the deserted flagstones, and were ourselves favored
with a very hard stare from the constable of the beat, who, however,
touched his helmet on recognizing my companion.

"You see, I'm known to the police," laughed Raffles as we passed on.
"Poor devils, they've got to keep their weather eye open on a night
like this!  A fog may be a bore to you and me, Bunny, but it's a
perfect godsend to the criminal classes, especially so late in their
season.  Here we are, though--and I'm hanged if the beggar isn't in bed
and asleep after all!"

We had turned into Bond Street, and had halted on the curb a few yards
down on the right.  Raffles was gazing up at some windows across the
road, windows barely discernible through the mist, and without the
glimmer of a light to throw them out. They were over a jeweller's shop,
as I could see by the peep-hole in the shop door, and the bright light
burning within.  But the entire "upper part," with the private
street-door next the shop, was black and blank as the sky itself.

"Better give it up for to-night," I urged. "Surely the morning will be
time enough!"

"Not a bit of it," said Raffles.  "I have his key. We'll surprise him.
Come along."

And seizing my right arm, he hurried me across the road, opened the
door with his latch-key, and in another moment had shut it swiftly but
softly behind us.  We stood together in the dark.  Outside, a measured
step was approaching; we had heard it through the fog as we crossed the
street; now, as it drew nearer, my companion's fingers tightened on my
arm.

"It may be the chap himself," he whispered. "He's the devil of a
night-bird.  Not a sound, Bunny!  We'll startle the life out of him.
Ah!"

The measured step had passed without a pause. Raffles drew a deep
breath, and his singular grip of me slowly relaxed.

"But still, not a sound," he continued in the same whisper; "we'll take
a rise out of him, wherever he is!  Slip off your shoes and follow me."

Well, you may wonder at my doing so; but you can never have met A. J.
Raffles.  Half his power lay in a conciliating trick of sinking the
commander in the leader.  And it was impossible not to follow one who
led with such a zest.  You might question, but you followed first.  So
now, when I heard him kick off his own shoes, I did the same, and was
on the stairs at his heels before I realized what an extraordinary way
was this of approaching a stranger for money in the dead of night.  But
obviously Raffles and he were on exceptional terms of intimacy, and I
could not but infer that they were in the habit of playing practical
jokes upon each other.

We groped our way so slowly upstairs that I had time to make more than
one note before we reached the top.  The stair was uncarpeted.  The
spread fingers of my right hand encountered nothing on the damp wall;
those of my left trailed through a dust that could be felt on the
banisters. An eerie sensation had been upon me since we entered the
house.  It increased with every step we climbed.  What hermit were we
going to startle in his cell?

We came to a landing.  The banisters led us to the left, and to the
left again.  Four steps more, and we were on another and a longer
landing, and suddenly a match blazed from the black.  I never heard it
struck.  Its flash was blinding.  When my eyes became accustomed to the
light, there was Raffles holding up the match with one hand, and
shading it with the other, between bare boards, stripped walls, and the
open doors of empty rooms.

"Where have you brought me?" I cried.  "The house is unoccupied!"

"Hush!  Wait!" he whispered, and he led the way into one of the empty
rooms.  His match went out as we crossed the threshold, and he struck
another without the slightest noise.  Then he stood with his back to
me, fumbling with something that I could not see.  But, when he threw
the second match away, there was some other light in its stead, and a
slight smell of oil.  I stepped forward to look over his shoulder, but
before I could do so he had turned and flashed a tiny lantern in my
face.

"What's this?" I gasped.  "What rotten trick are you going to play?"

"It's played," he answered, with his quiet laugh.

"On me?"

"I am afraid so, Bunny."

"Is there no one in the house, then?"

"No one but ourselves."

"So it was mere chaff about your friend in Bond Street, who could let
us have that money?"

"Not altogether.  It's quite true that Danby is a friend of mine."

"Danby?"

"The jeweller underneath."

"What do you mean?" I whispered, trembling like a leaf as his meaning
dawned upon me.  "Are we to get the money from the jeweller?"

"Well, not exactly."

"What, then?"

"The equivalent--from his shop."

There was no need for another question.  I understood everything but my
own density.  He had given me a dozen hints, and I had taken none. And
there I stood staring at him, in that empty room; and there he stood
with his dark lantern, laughing at me.

"A burglar!" I gasped.  "You--you!"

"I told you I lived by my wits."

"Why couldn't you tell me what you were going to do?  Why couldn't you
trust me?  Why must you lie?" I demanded, piqued to the quick for all
my horror.

"I wanted to tell you," said he.  "I was on the point of telling you
more than once.  You may remember how I sounded you about crime, though
you have probably forgotten what you said yourself.  I didn't think you
meant it at the time, but I thought I'd put you to the test.  Now I see
you didn't, and I don't blame you.  I only am to blame. Get out of it,
my dear boy, as quick as you can; leave it to me.  You won't give me
away, whatever else you do!"

Oh, his cleverness!  His fiendish cleverness! Had he fallen back on
threats, coercion, sneers, all might have been different even yet.  But
he set me free to leave him in the lurch.  He would not blame me.  He
did not even bind me to secrecy; he trusted me.  He knew my weakness
and my strength, and was playing on both with his master's touch.

"Not so fast," said I.  "Did I put this into your head, or were you
going to do it in any case?"

"Not in any case," said Raffles.  "It's true I've had the key for days,
but when I won to-night I thought of chucking it; for, as a matter of
fact, it's not a one-man job."

"That settles it.  I'm your man."

"You mean it?"

"Yes--for to-night."

"Good old Bunny," he murmured, holding the lantern for one moment to my
face; the next he was explaining his plans, and I was nodding, as
though we had been fellow-cracksmen all our days.

"I know the shop," he whispered, "because I've got a few things there.
I know this upper part too; it's been to let for a month, and I got an
order to view, and took a cast of the key before using it. The one
thing I don't know is how to make a connection between the two; at
present there's none. We may make it up here, though I rather fancy the
basement myself.  If you wait a minute I'll tell you."

He set his lantern on the floor, crept to a back window, and opened it
with scarcely a sound: only to return, shaking his head, after shutting
the window with the same care.

"That was our one chance," said he; "a back window above a back window;
but it's too dark to see anything, and we daren't show an outside
light. Come down after me to the basement; and remember, though there's
not a soul on the premises, you can't make too little noise.
There--there--listen to that!"

It was the measured tread that we had heard before on the flagstones
outside.  Raffles darkened his lantern, and again we stood motionless
till it had passed.

"Either a policeman," he muttered, "or a watchman that all these
jewellers run between them. The watchman's the man for us to watch;
he's simply paid to spot this kind of thing."

We crept very gingerly down the stairs, which creaked a bit in spite of
us, and we picked up our shoes in the passage; then down some narrow
stone steps, at the foot of which Raffles showed his light, and put on
his shoes once more, bidding me do the same in a rather louder tone
than he had permitted himself to employ overhead.  We were now
considerably below the level of the street, in a small space with as
many doors as it had sides.  Three were ajar, and we saw through them
into empty cellars; but in the fourth a key was turned and a bolt
drawn; and this one presently let us out into the bottom of a deep,
square well of fog.  A similar door faced it across this area, and
Raffles had the lantern close against it, and was hiding the light with
his body, when a short and sudden crash made my heart stand still.
Next moment I saw the door wide open, and Raffles standing within and
beckoning me with a jimmy.

"Door number one," he whispered.  "Deuce knows how many more there'll
be, but I know of two at least.  We won't have to make much noise over
them, either; down here there's less risk."

We were now at the bottom of the exact fellow to the narrow stone stair
which we had just descended: the yard, or well, being the one part
common to both the private and the business premises.  But this flight
led to no open passage; instead, a singularly solid mahogany door
confronted us at the top.

"I thought so," muttered Raffles, handing me the lantern, and pocketing
a bunch of skeleton keys, after tampering for a few minutes with the
lock. "It'll be an hour's work to get through that!"

"Can't you pick it?"

"No: I know these locks.  It's no use trying. We must cut it out, and
it'll take us an hour."

It took us forty-seven minutes by my watch; or, rather, it took
Raffles; and never in my life have I seen anything more deliberately
done.  My part was simply to stand by with the dark lantern in one
hand, and a small bottle of rock-oil in the other.

Raffles had produced a pretty embroidered case, intended obviously for
his razors, but filled instead with the tools of his secret trade,
including the rock-oil.  From this case he selected a "bit," capable of
drilling a hole an inch in diameter, and fitted it to a small but very
strong steel "brace." Then he took off his covert-coat and his blazer,
spread them neatly on the top step--knelt on them--turned up his shirt
cuffs--and went to work with brace-and-bit near the key-hole.  But
first he oiled the bit to minimize the noise, and this he did
invariably before beginning a fresh hole, and often in the middle of
one.  It took thirty-two separate borings to cut around that lock.

I noticed that through the first circular orifice Raffles thrust a
forefinger; then, as the circle became an ever-lengthening oval, he got
his hand through up to the thumb; and I heard him swear softly to
himself.

"I was afraid so!"

"What is it?"

"An iron gate on the other side!"

"How on earth are we to get through that?" I asked in dismay.

"Pick the lock.  But there may be two.  In that case they'll be top and
bottom, and we shall have two fresh holes to make, as the door opens
inwards. It won't open two inches as it is."

I confess I did not feel sanguine about the lock-picking, seeing that
one lock had baffled us already; and my disappointment and impatience
must have been a revelation to me had I stopped to think. The truth is
that I was entering into our nefarious undertaking with an involuntary
zeal of which I was myself quite unconscious at the time.  The romance
and the peril of the whole proceeding held me spellbound and entranced.
My moral sense and my sense of fear were stricken by a common
paralysis.  And there I stood, shining my light and holding my phial
with a keener interest than I had ever brought to any honest avocation.
And there knelt A. J. Raffles, with his black hair tumbled, and the
same watchful, quiet, determined half-smile with which I have seen him
send down over after over in a county match!

At last the chain of holes was complete, the lock wrenched out bodily,
and a splendid bare arm plunged up to the shoulder through the
aperture, and through the bars of the iron gate beyond.

"Now," whispered Raffles, "if there's only one lock it'll be in the
middle.  Joy!  Here it is!  Only let me pick it, and we're through at
last."

He withdrew his arm, a skeleton key was selected from the bunch, and
then back went his arm to the shoulder.  It was a breathless moment.  I
heard the heart throbbing in my body, the very watch ticking in my
pocket, and ever and anon the tinkle-tinkle of the skeleton key.
Then--at last--there came a single unmistakable click.  In another
minute the mahogany door and the iron gate yawned behind us; and
Raffles was sitting on an office table, wiping his face, with the
lantern throwing a steady beam by his side.

We were now in a bare and roomy lobby behind the shop, but separated
therefrom by an iron curtain, the very sight of which filled me with
despair. Raffles, however, did not appear in the least depressed, but
hung up his coat and hat on some pegs in the lobby before examining
this curtain with his lantern.

"That's nothing," said he, after a minute's inspection; "we'll be
through that in no time, but there's a door on the other side which may
give us trouble."

"Another door!" I groaned.  "And how do you mean to tackle this thing?"

"Prise it up with the jointed jimmy.  The weak point of these iron
curtains is the leverage you can get from below.  But it makes a noise,
and this is where you're coming in, Bunny; this is where I couldn't do
without you.  I must have you overhead to knock through when the
street's clear. I'll come with you and show a light."

Well, you may imagine how little I liked the prospect of this lonely
vigil; and yet there was something very stimulating in the vital
responsibility which it involved.  Hitherto I had been a mere
spectator.  Now I was to take part in the game. And the fresh
excitement made me more than ever insensible to those considerations of
conscience and of safety which were already as dead nerves in my breast.

So I took my post without a murmur in the front room above the shop.
The fixtures had been left for the refusal of the incoming tenant, and
fortunately for us they included Venetian blinds which were already
down.  It was the simplest matter in the world to stand peeping through
the laths into the street, to beat twice with my foot when anybody was
approaching, and once when all was clear again.  The noises that even I
could hear below, with the exception of one metallic crash at the
beginning, were indeed incredibly slight; but they ceased altogether at
each double rap from my toe; and a policeman passed quite half a dozen
times beneath my eyes, and the man whom I took to be the jeweller's
watchman oftener still, during the better part of an hour that I spent
at the window.  Once, indeed, my heart was in my mouth, but only once.
It was when the watchman stopped and peered through the peep-hole into
the lighted shop.  I waited for his whistle--I waited for the gallows
or the gaol!  But my signals had been studiously obeyed, and the man
passed on in undisturbed serenity.

In the end I had a signal in my turn, and retraced my steps with
lighted matches, down the broad stairs, down the narrow ones, across
the area, and up into the lobby where Raffles awaited me with an
outstretched hand.

"Well done, my boy!" said he.  "You're the same good man in a pinch,
and you shall have your reward.  I've got a thousand pounds' worth if
I've got a penn'oth.  It's all in my pockets.  And here's something
else I found in this locker; very decent port and some cigars, meant
for poor dear Danby's business friends.  Take a pull, and you shall
light up presently.  I've found a lavatory, too, and we must have a
wash-and-brush-up before we go, for I'm as black as your boot."

The iron curtain was down, but he insisted on raising it until I could
peep through the glass door on the other side and see his handiwork in
the shop beyond.  Here two electric lights were left burning all night
long, and in their cold white rays I could at first see nothing amiss.
I looked along an orderly lane, an empty glass counter on my left,
glass cupboards of untouched silver on my right, and facing me the
filmy black eye of the peep-hole that shone like a stage moon on the
street.  The counter had not been emptied by Raffles; its contents were
in the Chubb's safe, which he had given up at a glance; nor had he
looked at the silver, except to choose a cigarette case for me.  He had
confined himself entirely to the shop window.  This was in three
compartments, each secured for the night by removable panels with
separate locks. Raffles had removed them a few hours before their time,
and the electric light shone on a corrugated shutter bare as the ribs
of an empty carcase.  Every article of value was gone from the one
place which was invisible from the little window in the door; elsewhere
all was as it had been left overnight. And but for a train of mangled
doors behind the iron curtain, a bottle of wine and a cigar-box with
which liberties had been taken, a rather black towel in the lavatory, a
burnt match here and there, and our finger-marks on the dusty
banisters, not a trace of our visit did we leave.

"Had it in my head for long?" said Raffles, as we strolled through the
streets towards dawn, for all the world as though we were returning
from a dance.  "No, Bunny, I never thought of it till I saw that upper
part empty about a month ago, and bought a few things in the shop to
get the lie of the land.  That reminds me that I never paid for them;
but, by Jove, I will to-morrow, and if that isn't poetic justice, what
is?  One visit showed me the possibilities of the place, but a second
convinced me of its impossibilities without a pal.  So I had
practically given up the idea, when you came along on the very night
and in the very plight for it!  But here we are at the Albany, and I
hope there's some fire left; for I don't know how you feel, Bunny, but
for my part I'm as cold as Keats's owl."

He could think of Keats on his way from a felony!  He could hanker for
his fireside like another!  Floodgates were loosed within me, and the
plain English of our adventure rushed over me as cold as ice.  Raffles
was a burglar.  I had helped him to commit one burglary, therefore I
was a burglar, too.  Yet I could stand and warm myself by his fire, and
watch him empty his pockets, as though we had done nothing wonderful or
wicked!

My blood froze.  My heart sickened.  My brain whirled.  How I had liked
this villain!  How I had admired him!  Now my liking and admiration
must turn to loathing and disgust.  I waited for the change.  I longed
to feel it in my heart.  But--I longed and I waited in vain!

I saw that he was emptying his pockets; the table sparkled with their
hoard.  Rings by the dozen, diamonds by the score; bracelets, pendants,
aigrettes, necklaces, pearls, rubies, amethysts, sapphires; and
diamonds always, diamonds in everything, flashing bayonets of light,
dazzling me--blinding me--making me disbelieve because I could no
longer forget.  Last of all came no gem, indeed, but my own revolver
from an inner pocket. And that struck a chord.  I suppose I said
something--my hand flew out.  I can see Raffles now, as he looked at me
once more with a high arch over each clear eye.  I can see him pick out
the cartridges with his quiet, cynical smile, before he would give me
my pistol back again.

"You mayn't believe it, Bunny," said he, "but I never carried a loaded
one before.  On the whole I think it gives one confidence.  Yet it
would be very awkward if anything went wrong; one might use it, and
that's not the game at all, though I have often thought that the
murderer who has just done the trick must have great sensations before
things get too hot for him.  Don't look so distressed, my dear chap.
I've never had those sensations, and I don't suppose I ever shall."

"But this much you have done before?" said I hoarsely.

"Before?  My dear Bunny, you offend me!  Did it look like a first
attempt?  Of course I have done it before."

"Often?"

"Well--no!  Not often enough to destroy the charm, at all events;
never, as a matter of fact, unless I'm cursedly hard up.  Did you hear
about the Thimbleby diamonds?  Well, that was the last time--and a poor
lot of paste they were.  Then there was the little business of the
Dormer house-boat at Henley last year.  That was mine also--such as it
was.  I've never brought off a really big coup yet; when I do I shall
chuck it up."

Yes, I remembered both cases very well.  To think that he was their
author!  It was incredible, outrageous, inconceivable.  Then my eyes
would fall upon the table, twinkling and glittering in a hundred
places, and incredulity was at an end.

"How came you to begin?" I asked, as curiosity overcame mere wonder,
and a fascination for his career gradually wove itself into my
fascination for the man.

"Ah! that's a long story," said Raffles.  "It was in the Colonies, when
I was out there playing cricket.  It's too long a story to tell you
now, but I was in much the same fix that you were in to-night, and it
was my only way out.  I never meant it for anything more; but I'd
tasted blood, and it was all over with me.  Why should I work when I
could steal?  Why settle down to some humdrum uncongenial billet, when
excitement, romance, danger and a decent living were all going begging
together?  Of course it's very wrong, but we can't all be moralists,
and the distribution of wealth is very wrong to begin with.  Besides,
you're not at it all the time.  I'm sick of quoting Gilbert's lines to
myself, but they're profoundly true.  I only wonder if you'll like the
life as much as I do!"

"Like it?" I cried out.  "Not I!  It's no life for me.  Once is enough!"

"You wouldn't give me a hand another time?"

"Don't ask me, Raffles.  Don't ask me, for God's sake!"

"Yet you said you would do anything for me! You asked me to name my
crime!  But I knew at the time you didn't mean it; you didn't go back
on me to-night, and that ought to satisfy me, goodness knows!  I
suppose I'm ungrateful, and unreasonable, and all that.  I ought to let
it end at this.  But you're the very man for me, Bunny, the--very--man!
Just think how we got through to-night.  Not a scratch--not a hitch!
There's nothing very terrible in it, you see; there never would be,
while we worked together."

He was standing in front of me with a hand on either shoulder; he was
smiling as he knew so well how to smile.  I turned on my heel, planted
my elbows on the chimney-piece, and my burning head between my hands.
Next instant a still heartier hand had fallen on my back.

"All right, my boy!  You are quite right and I'm worse than wrong.
I'll never ask it again. Go, if you want to, and come again about
mid-day for the cash.  There was no bargain; but, of course, I'll get
you out of your scrape--especially after the way you've stood by me
to-night."

I was round again with my blood on fire.

"I'll do it again," I said, through my teeth.

He shook his head.  "Not you," he said, smiling quite good-humoredly on
my insane enthusiasm.

"I will," I cried with an oath.  "I'll lend you a hand as often as you
like!  What does it matter now?  I've been in it once.  I'll be in it
again.  I've gone to the devil anyhow.  I can't go back, and wouldn't
if I could.  Nothing matters another rap!  When you want me, I'm your
man!"

And that is how Raffles and I joined felonious forces on the Ides of
March.



A COSTUME PIECE

London was just then talking of one whose name is already a name and
nothing more. Reuben Rosenthall had made his millions on the diamond
fields of South Africa, and had come home to enjoy them according to
his lights; how he went to work will scarcely be forgotten by any
reader of the halfpenny evening papers, which revelled in endless
anecdotes of his original indigence and present prodigality, varied
with interesting particulars of the extraordinary establishment which
the millionaire set up in St.  John's Wood.  Here he kept a retinue of
Kaffirs, who were literally his slaves; and hence he would sally, with
enormous diamonds in his shirt and on his finger, in the convoy of a
prize-fighter of heinous repute, who was not, however, by any means the
worst element in the Rosenthall melange.  So said common gossip; but
the fact was sufficiently established by the interference of the police
on at least one occasion, followed by certain magisterial proceedings
which were reported with justifiable gusto and huge headlines in the
newspapers aforesaid.

And this was all one knew of Reuben Rosenthall up to the time when the
Old Bohemian Club, having fallen on evil days, found it worth its while
to organize a great dinner in honor of so wealthy an exponent of the
club's principles.  I was not at the banquet myself, but a member took
Raffles, who told me all about it that very night.

"Most extraordinary show I ever went to in my life," said he.  "As for
the man himself--well, I was prepared for something grotesque, but the
fellow fairly took my breath away.  To begin with, he's the most
astounding brute to look at, well over six feet, with a chest like a
barrel, and a great hook-nose, and the reddest hair and whiskers you
ever saw.  Drank like a fire-engine, but only got drunk enough to make
us a speech that I wouldn't have missed for ten pounds.  I'm only sorry
you weren't there, too, Bunny, old chap."

I began to be sorry myself, for Raffles was anything but an excitable
person, and never had I seen him so excited before.  Had he been
following Rosenthall's example?  His coming to my rooms at midnight,
merely to tell me about his dinner, was in itself enough to excuse a
suspicion which was certainly at variance with my knowledge of A. J.
Raffles.

"What did he say?" I inquired mechanically, divining some subtler
explanation of this visit, and wondering what on earth it could be.

"Say?" cried Raffles.  "What did he not say!  He boasted of his rise,
he bragged of his riches, and he blackguarded society for taking him up
for his money and dropping him out of sheer pique and jealousy because
he had so much.  He mentioned names, too, with the most charming
freedom, and swore he was as good a man as the Old Country had to
show--PACE the Old Bohemians. To prove it he pointed to a great diamond
in the middle of his shirt-front with a little finger loaded with
another just like it: which of our bloated princes could show a pair
like that?  As a matter of fact, they seemed quite wonderful stones,
with a curious purple gleam to them that must mean a pot of money.  But
old Rosenthall swore he wouldn't take fifty thousand pounds for the
two, and wanted to know where the other man was who went about with
twenty-five thousand in his shirt-front and another twenty-five on his
little finger. He didn't exist.  If he did, he wouldn't have the pluck
to wear them.  But he had--he'd tell us why. And before you could say
Jack Robinson he had whipped out a whacking great revolver!"

"Not at the table?"

"At the table!  In the middle of his speech!  But it was nothing to
what he wanted to do.  He actually wanted us to let him write his name
in bullets on the opposite wall, to show us why he wasn't afraid to go
about in all his diamonds!  That brute Purvis, the prize-fighter, who
is his paid bully, had to bully his master before he could be persuaded
out of it.  There was quite a panic for the moment; one fellow was
saying his prayers under the table, and the waiters bolted to a man."

"What a grotesque scene!"

"Grotesque enough, but I rather wish they had let him go the whole hog
and blaze away.  He was as keen as knives to show us how he could take
care of his purple diamonds; and, do you know, Bunny, _I_ was as keen
as knives to see."

And Raffles leaned towards me with a sly, slow smile that made the
hidden meaning of his visit only too plain to me at last.

"So you think of having a try for his diamonds yourself?"

He shrugged his shoulders.

"It is horribly obvious, I admit.  But--yes, I have set my heart upon
them!  To be quite frank, I have had them on my conscience for some
time; one couldn't hear so much of the man, and his prize-fighter, and
his diamonds, without feeling it a kind of duty to have a go for them;
but when it comes to brandishing a revolver and practically challenging
the world, the thing becomes inevitable.  It is simply thrust upon one.
I was fated to hear that challenge, Bunny, and I, for one, must take it
up.  I was only sorry I couldn't get on my hind legs and say so then
and there."

"Well," I said, "I don't see the necessity as things are with us; but,
of course, I'm your man."

My tone may have been half-hearted.  I did my best to make it
otherwise.  But it was barely a month since our Bond Street exploit,
and we certainly could have afforded to behave ourselves for some time
to come.  We had been getting along so nicely: by his advice I had
scribbled a thing or two; inspired by Raffles, I had even done an
article on our own jewel robbery; and for the moment I was quite
satisfied with this sort of adventure.  I thought we ought to know when
we were well off, and could see no point in our running fresh risks
before we were obliged.  On the other hand, I was anxious not to show
the least disposition to break the pledge that I had given a month ago.
But it was not on my manifest disinclination that Raffles fastened.

"Necessity, my dear Bunny?  Does the writer only write when the wolf is
at the door?  Does the painter paint for bread alone?  Must you and I
be DRIVEN to crime like Tom of Bow and Dick of Whitechapel?  You pain
me, my dear chap; you needn't laugh, because you do.  Art for art's
sake is a vile catchword, but I confess it appeals to me. In this case
my motives are absolutely pure, for I doubt if we shall ever be able to
dispose of such peculiar stones.  But if I don't have a try for
them--after to-night--I shall never be able to hold up my head again."

His eye twinkled, but it glittered, too.

"We shall have our work cut out," was all I said.

"And do you suppose I should be keen on it if we hadn't?" cried
Raffles.  "My dear fellow, I would rob St. Paul's Cathedral if I could,
but I could no more scoop a till when the shopwalker wasn't looking
than I could bag the apples out of an old woman's basket.  Even that
little business last month was a sordid affair, but it was necessary,
and I think its strategy redeemed it to some extent. Now there's some
credit, and more sport, in going where they boast they're on their
guard against you.  The Bank of England, for example, is the ideal
crib; but that would need half a dozen of us with years to give to the
job; and meanwhile Reuben Rosenthall is high enough game for you and
me.  We know he's armed.  We know how Billy Purvis can fight.  It'll be
no soft thing, I grant you. But what of that, my good Bunny--what of
that?  A man's reach must exceed his grasp, dear boy, or what the
dickens is a heaven for?"

"I would rather we didn't exceed ours just yet," I answered laughing,
for his spirit was irresistible, and the plan was growing upon me,
despite my qualms.

"Trust me for that," was his reply; "I'll see you through.  After all I
expect to find that the difficulties are nearly all on the surface.
These fellows both drink like the devil, and that should simplify
matters considerably.  But we shall see, and we must take our time.
There will probably turn out to be a dozen different ways in which the
thing might be done, and we shall have to choose between them.  It will
mean watching the house for at least a week in any case; it may mean
lots of other things that will take much longer; but give me a week and
I will tell you more.  That's to say, if you're really on?"

"Of course I am," I replied indignantly.  "But why should I give you a
week?  Why shouldn't we watch the house together?"

"Because two eyes are as good as four and take up less room.  Never
hunt in couples unless you're obliged.  But don't you look offended,
Bunny; there'll be plenty for you to do when the time comes, that I
promise you.  You shall have your share of the fun, never fear, and a
purple diamond all to yourself--if we're lucky."

On the whole, however, this conversation left me less than lukewarm,
and I still remember the depression which came upon me when Raffles was
gone.  I saw the folly of the enterprise to which I had committed
myself--the sheer, gratuitous, unnecessary folly of it.  And the
paradoxes in which Raffles revelled, and the frivolous casuistry which
was nevertheless half sincere, and which his mere personality rendered
wholly plausible at the moment of utterance, appealed very little to me
when recalled in cold blood.  I admired the spirit of pure mischief in
which he seemed prepared to risk his liberty and his life, but I did
not find it an infectious spirit on calm reflection.  Yet the thought
of withdrawal was not to be entertained for a moment.  On the contrary,
I was impatient of the delay ordained by Raffles; and, perhaps, no
small part of my secret disaffection came of his galling determination
to do without me until the last moment.

It made it no better that this was characteristic of the man and of his
attitude towards me.  For a month we had been, I suppose, the thickest
thieves in all London, and yet our intimacy was curiously incomplete.
With all his charming frankness, there was in Raffles a vein of
capricious reserve which was perceptible enough to be very irritating.
He had the instinctive secretiveness of the inveterate criminal.  He
would make mysteries of matters of common concern; for example, I never
knew how or where he disposed of the Bond Street jewels, on the
proceeds of which we were both still leading the outward lives of
hundreds of other young fellows about town.  He was consistently
mysterious about that and other details, of which it seemed to me that
I had already earned the right to know everything.  I could not but
remember how he had led me into my first felony, by means of a trick,
while yet uncertain whether he could trust me or not.

That I could no longer afford to resent, but I did resent his want of
confidence in me now.  I said nothing about it, but it rankled every
day, and never more than in the week that succeeded the Rosenthall
dinner.  When I met Raffles at the club he would tell me nothing; when
I went to his rooms he was out, or pretended to be.

One day he told me he was getting on well, but slowly; it was a more
ticklish game than he had thought; but when I began to ask questions he
would say no more.  Then and there, in my annoyance, I took my own
decision.  Since he would tell me nothing of the result of his vigils,
I determined to keep one on my own account, and that very evening found
my way to the millionaire's front gates.

The house he was occupying is, I believe, quite the largest in the St.
John's Wood district.  It stands in the angle formed by two broad
thoroughfares, neither of which, as it happens, is a 'bus route, and I
doubt if many quieter spots exist within the four-mile radius.  Quiet
also was the great square house, in its garden of grass-plots and
shrubs; the lights were low, the millionaire and his friends obviously
spending their evening elsewhere.  The garden walls were only a few
feet high.  In one there was a side door opening into a glass passage;
in the other two five-barred, grained-and-varnished gates, one at
either end of the little semi-circular drive, and both wide open. So
still was the place that I had a great mind to walk boldly in and learn
something of the premises; in fact, I was on the point of doing so,
when I heard a quick, shuffling step on the pavement behind me.  I
turned round and faced the dark scowl and the dirty clenched fists of a
dilapidated tramp.

"You fool!" said he.  "You utter idiot!"

"Raffles!"

"That's it," he whispered savagely; "tell all the neighborhood--give me
away at the top of your voice!"

With that he turned his back upon me, and shambled down the road,
shrugging his shoulders and muttering to himself as though I had
refused him alms.  A few moments I stood astounded, indignant, at a
loss; then I followed him.  His feet trailed, his knees gave, his back
was bowed, his head kept nodding; it was the gait of a man eighty years
of age.  Presently he waited for me midway between two lamp-posts.  As
I came up he was lighting rank tobacco, in a cutty pipe, with an
evil-smelling match, and the flame showed me the suspicion of a smile.

"You must forgive my heat, Bunny, but it really was very foolish of
you.  Here am I trying every dodge--begging at the door one
night--hiding in the shrubs the next--doing every mortal thing but
stand and stare at the house as you went and did. It's a costume piece,
and in you rush in your ordinary clothes.  I tell you they're on the
lookout for us night and day.  It's the toughest nut I ever tackled!"

"Well," said I, "if you had told me so before I shouldn't have come.
You told me nothing."

He looked hard at me from under the broken brim of a battered billycock.

"You're right," he said at length.  "I've been too close.  It's become
second nature with me when I've anything on.  But here's an end of it,
Bunny, so far as you're concerned.  I'm going home now, and I want you
to follow me; but for heaven's sake keep your distance, and don't speak
to me again till I speak to you.  There--give me a start."  And he was
off again, a decrepit vagabond, with his hands in his pockets, his
elbows squared, and frayed coat-tails swinging raggedly from side to
side.

I followed him to the Finchley Road.  There he took an Atlas omnibus,
and I sat some rows behind him on the top, but not far enough to escape
the pest of his vile tobacco.  That he could carry his character-sketch
to such a pitch--he who would only smoke one brand of cigarette!  It
was the last, least touch of the insatiable artist, and it charmed away
what mortification there still remained in me. Once more I felt the
fascination of a comrade who was forever dazzling one with a fresh and
unsuspected facet of his character.

As we neared Piccadilly I wondered what he would do.  Surely he was not
going into the Albany like that?  No, he took another omnibus to Sloane
Street, I sitting behind him as before.  At Sloane Street we changed
again, and were presently in the long lean artery of the King's Road.
I was now all agog to know our destination, nor was I kept many more
minutes in doubt.  Raffles got down.  I followed.  He crossed the road
and disappeared up a dark turning.  I pressed after him, and was in
time to see his coat-tails as he plunged into a still darker flagged
alley to the right.  He was holding himself up and stepping out like a
young man once more; also, in some subtle way, he already looked less
disreputable.  But I alone was there to see him, the alley was
absolutely deserted, and desperately dark.  At the further end he
opened a door with a latch-key, and it was darker yet within.

Instinctively I drew back and heard him chuckle. We could no longer see
each other.

"All right, Bunny!  There's no hanky-panky this time.  These are
studios, my friend, and I'm one of the lawful tenants."

Indeed, in another minute we were in a lofty room with skylight,
easels, dressing-cupboard, platform, and every other adjunct save the
signs of actual labor.  The first thing I saw, as Raffles lit the gas,
was its reflection in his silk hat on the pegs beside the rest of his
normal garments.

"Looking for the works of art?" continued Raffles, lighting a cigarette
and beginning to divest himself of his rags.  "I'm afraid you won't
find any, but there's the canvas I'm always going to make a start upon.
I tell them I'm looking high and low for my ideal model.  I have the
stove lit on principle twice a week, and look in and leave a newspaper
and a smell of Sullivans--how good they are after shag!  Meanwhile I
pay my rent and am a good tenant in every way; and it's a very useful
little pied-a-terre--there's no saying how useful it might be at a
pinch.  As it is, the billy-cock comes in and the topper goes out, and
nobody takes the slightest notice of either; at this time of night the
chances are that there's not a soul in the building except ourselves."

"You never told me you went in for disguises," said I, watching him as
he cleansed the grime from his face and hands.

"No, Bunny, I've treated you very shabbily all round.  There was really
no reason why I shouldn't have shown you this place a month ago, and
yet there was no point in my doing so, and circumstances are just
conceivable in which it would have suited us both for you to be in
genuine ignorance of my whereabouts.  I have something to sleep on, as
you perceive, in case of need, and, of course, my name is not Raffles
in the King's Road.  So you will see that one might bolt further and
fare worse."

"Meanwhile you use the place as a dressing-room?"

"It is my private pavilion," said Raffles.  "Disguises?  In some cases
they're half the battle, and it's always pleasant to feel that, if the
worst comes to the worst, you needn't necessarily be convicted under
your own name.  Then they're indispensable in dealing with the fences.
I drive all my bargains in the tongue and raiment of Shoreditch.  If I
didn't there'd be the very devil to pay in blackmail. Now, this
cupboard's full of all sorts of toggery. I tell the woman who cleans
the room that it's for my models when I find 'em.  By the way, I only
hope I've got something that'll fit you, for you'll want a rig for
to-morrow night."

"To-morrow night!" I exclaimed.  "Why, what do you mean to do?"

"The trick," said Raffles.  "I intended writing to you as soon as I got
back to my rooms, to ask you to look me up to-morrow afternoon; then I
was going to unfold my plan of campaign, and take you straight into
action then and there.  There's nothing like putting the nervous
players in first; it's the sitting with their pads on that upsets their
applecart; that was another of my reasons for being so confoundedly
close.  You must try to forgive me.  I couldn't help remembering how
well you played up last trip, without any time to weaken on it
beforehand.  All I want is for you to be as cool and smart to-morrow
night as you were then; though, by Jove, there's no comparison between
the two cases!"

"I thought you would find it so."

"You were right.  I have.  Mind you, I don't say this will be the
tougher job all round; we shall probably get in without any difficulty
at all; it's the getting out again that may flummox us.  That's the
worst of an irregular household!" cried Raffles, with quite a burst of
virtuous indignation.  "I assure you, Bunny, I spent the whole of
Monday night in the shrubbery of the garden next door, looking over the
wall, and, if you'll believe me, somebody was about all night long!  I
don't mean the Kaffirs.  I don't believe they ever get to bed at
all--poor devils!  No, I mean Rosenthall himself, and that pasty-faced
beast Purvis.  They were up and drinking from midnight, when they came
in, to broad daylight, when I cleared out.  Even then I left them sober
enough to slang each other.  By the way, they very nearly came to blows
in the garden, within a few yards of me, and I heard something that
might come in useful and make Rosenthall shoot crooked at a critical
moment.  You know what an I. D. B. is?"

"Illicit Diamond Buyer?"

"Exactly.  Well, it seems that Rosenthall was one.  He must have let it
out to Purvis in his cups. Anyhow, I heard Purvis taunting him with it,
and threatening him with the breakwater at Capetown; and I begin to
think our friends are friend and foe. But about to-morrow night:
there's nothing subtle in my plan.  It's simply to get in while these
fellows are out on the loose, and to lie low till they come back, and
longer.  If possible, we must doctor the whiskey.  That would simplify
the whole thing, though it's not a very sporting game to play; still,
we must remember Rosenthall's revolver; we don't want him to sign his
name on US.  With all those Kaffirs about, however, it's ten to one on
the whiskey, and a hundred to one against us if we go looking for it.
A brush with the heathen would spoil everything, if it did no more.
Besides, there are the ladies--"

"The deuce there are!"

"Ladies with an _I_, and the very voices for raising Cain.  I fear, I
fear the clamor!  It would be fatal to us.  Au contraire, if we can
manage to stow ourselves away unbeknownst, half the battle will be won.
If Rosenthall turns in drunk, it's a purple diamond apiece.  If he sits
up sober, it may be a bullet instead.  We will hope not, Bunny; and all
the firing wouldn't be on one side; but it's on the knees of the gods."

And so we left it when we shook hands in Picadilly--not by any means as
much later as I could have wished.  Raffles would not ask me to his
rooms that night.  He said he made it a rule to have a long night
before playing cricket and--other games.  His final word to me was
framed on the same principle.

"Mind, only one drink to-night, Bunny.  Two at the outside--as you
value your life--and mine!"

I remember my abject obedience; and the endless, sleepless night it
gave me; and the roofs of the houses opposite standing out at last
against the blue-gray London dawn.  I wondered whether I should ever
see another, and was very hard on myself for that little expedition
which I had made on my own wilful account.

It was between eight and nine o'clock in the evening when we took up
our position in the garden adjoining that of Reuben Rosenthall; the
house itself was shut up, thanks to the outrageous libertine next door,
who, by driving away the neighbors, had gone far towards delivering
himself into our hands.  Practically secure from surprise on that side,
we could watch our house under cover of a wall just high enough to see
over, while a fair margin of shrubs in either garden afforded us
additional protection.  Thus entrenched, we had stood an hour, watching
a pair of lighted bow-windows with vague shadows flitting continually
across the blinds, and listening to the drawing of corks, the clink of
glasses, and a gradual crescendo of coarse voices within.  Our luck
seemed to have deserted us: the owner of the purple diamonds was dining
at home and dining at undue length.  I thought it was a dinner-party.
Raffles differed; in the end he proved right.  Wheels grated in the
drive, a carriage and pair stood at the steps; there was a stampede
from the dining-room, and the loud voices died away, to burst forth
presently from the porch.

Let me make our position perfectly clear.  We were over the wall, at
the side of the house, but a few feet from the dining-room windows.  On
our right, one angle of the building cut the back lawn in two
diagonally; on our left, another angle just permitted us to see the
jutting steps and the waiting carriage.  We saw Rosenthall come
out--saw the glimmer of his diamonds before anything. Then came the
pugilist; then a lady with a head of hair like a bath sponge; then
another, and the party was complete.

Raffles ducked and pulled me down in great excitement.

"The ladies are going with them," he whispered.  "This is great!"

"That's better still."

"The Gardenia!" the millionaire had bawled.

"And that's best of all," said Raffles, standing upright as hoofs and
wheels crunched through the gates and rattled off at a fine speed.

"Now what?" I whispered, trembling with excitement.

"They'll be clearing away.  Yes, here come their shadows.  The
drawing-room windows open on the lawn.  Bunny, it's the psychological
moment. Where's that mask?"

I produced it with a hand whose trembling I tried in vain to still, and
could have died for Raffles when he made no comment on what he could
not fail to notice.  His own hands were firm and cool as he adjusted my
mask for me, and then his own.

"By Jove, old boy," he whispered cheerily, "you look about the greatest
ruffian I ever saw! These masks alone will down a nigger, if we meet
one.  But I'm glad I remembered to tell you not to shave.  You'll pass
for Whitechapel if the worst comes to the worst and you don't forget to
talk the lingo.  Better sulk like a mule if you're not sure of it, and
leave the dialogue to me; but, please our stars, there will be no need.
Now, are you ready?"

"Quite."

"Got your gag?"

"Yes."

"Shooter?"

"Yes."

"Then follow me."

In an instant we were over the wall, in another on the lawn behind the
house.  There was no moon. The very stars in their courses had veiled
themselves for our benefit.  I crept at my leader's heels to some
French windows opening upon a shallow veranda.  He pushed.  They
yielded.

"Luck again," he whispered; "nothing BUT luck! Now for a light."

And the light came!

A good score of electric burners glowed red for the fraction of a
second, then rained merciless white beams into our blinded eyes.  When
we found our sight four revolvers covered us, and between two of them
the colossal frame of Reuben Rosenthall shook with a wheezy laughter
from head to foot.

"Good-evening, boys," he hiccoughed.  "Glad to see ye at last.  Shift
foot or finger, you on the left, though, and you're a dead boy.  I mean
you, you greaser!" he roared out at Raffles.  "I know you.  I've been
waitin' for you.  I've been WATCHIN' you all this week!  Plucky smart
you thought yerself, didn't you?  One day beggin', next time shammin'
tight, and next one o' them old pals from Kimberley what never come
when I'm in.  But you left the same tracks every day, you buggins, an'
the same tracks every night, all round the blessed premises."

"All right, guv'nor," drawled Raffles; "don't excite.  It's a fair cop.
We don't sweat to know 'ow you brung it orf.  On'y don't you go for to
shoot, 'cos we 'int awmed, s'help me Gord!"

"Ah, you're a knowin' one," said Rosenthall, fingering his triggers.
"But you've struck a knowin'er."

"Ho, yuss, we know all abaht thet!  Set a thief to ketch a thief--ho,
yuss."

My eyes had torn themselves from the round black muzzles, from the
accursed diamonds that had been our snare, the pasty pig-face of the
over-fed pugilist, and the flaming cheeks and hook nose of Rosenthall
himself.  I was looking beyond them at the doorway filled with
quivering silk and plush, black faces, white eyeballs, woolly pates.
But a sudden silence recalled my attention to the millionaire.  And
only his nose retained its color.

"What d'ye mean?" he whispered with a hoarse oath.  "Spit it out, or,
by Christmas, I'll drill you!"

"Whort price thet brikewater?" drawled Raffles coolly.

"Eh?"

Rosenthall's revolvers were describing widening orbits.

"Whort price thet brikewater--old _I.D.B._?"

"Where in hell did you get hold o' that?" asked Rosenthall, with a
rattle in his thick neck, meant for mirth.

"You may well arst," says Raffles.  "It's all over the plice w'ere _I_
come from."

"Who can have spread such rot?"

"I dunno," says Raffles; "arst the gen'leman on yer left; p'r'aps 'E
knows."

The gentleman on his left had turned livid with emotion.  Guilty
conscience never declared itself in plainer terms.  For a moment his
small eyes bulged like currants in the suet of his face; the next, he
had pocketed his pistols on a professional instinct, and was upon us
with his fists.

"Out o' the light--out o' the light!" yelled Rosenthall in a frenzy.

He was too late.  No sooner had the burly pugilist obstructed his fire
than Raffles was through the window at a bound; while I, for standing
still and saying nothing, was scientifically felled to the floor.


I cannot have been many moments without my senses.  When I recovered
them there was a great to-do in the garden, but I had the drawing-room
to myself.  I sat up.  Rosenthall and Purvis were rushing about
outside, cursing the Kaffirs and nagging at each other.

"Over THAT wall, I tell yer!"

"I tell you it was this one.  Can't you whistle for the police?"

"Police be damned!  I've had enough of the blessed police."

"Then we'd better get back and make sure of the other rotter."

"Oh, make sure o' yer skin.  That's what you'd better do.  Jala, you
black hog, if I catch YOU skulkin'...."

I never heard the threat.  I was creeping from the drawing-room on my
hands and knees, my own revolver swinging by its steel ring from my
teeth.

For an instant I thought that the hall also was deserted.  I was wrong,
and I crept upon a Kaffir on all fours.  Poor devil, I could not bring
myself to deal him a base blow, but I threatened him most hideously
with my revolver, and left the white teeth chattering in his black head
as I took the stairs three at a time.  Why I went upstairs in that
decisive fashion, as though it were my only course, I cannot explain.
But garden and ground floor seemed alive with men, and I might have
done worse.

I turned into the first room I came to.  It was a bedroom--empty,
though lit up; and never shall I forget how I started as I entered, on
encountering the awful villain that was myself at full length in a
pier-glass!  Masked, armed, and ragged, I was indeed fit carrion for a
bullet or the hangman, and to one or the other I made up my mind.
Nevertheless, I hid myself in the wardrobe behind the mirror; and there
I stood shivering and cursing my fate, my folly, and Raffles most of
all--Raffles first and last--for I daresay half an hour.  Then the
wardrobe door was flung suddenly open; they had stolen into the room
without a sound; and I was hauled downstairs, an ignominious captive.

Gross scenes followed in the hall; the ladies were now upon the stage,
and at sight of the desperate criminal they screamed with one accord.
In truth I must have given them fair cause, though my mask was now torn
away and hid nothing but my left ear.  Rosenthall answered their
shrieks with a roar for silence; the woman with the bath-sponge hair
swore at him shrilly in return; the place became a Babel impossible to
describe.  I remember wondering how long it would be before the police
appeared.  Purvis and the ladies were for calling them in and giving me
in charge without delay.  Rosenthall would not hear of it.  He swore
that he would shoot man or woman who left his sight.  He had had enough
of the police.  He was not going to have them coming there to spoil
sport; he was going to deal with me in his own way.  With that he
dragged me from all other hands, flung me against a door, and sent a
bullet crashing through the wood within an inch of my ear.

"You drunken fool!  It'll be murder!" shouted Purvis, getting in the
way a second time.

"Wha' do I care?  He's armed, isn't he?  I shot him in self-defence.
It'll be a warning to others.  Will you stand aside, or d'ye want it
yourself?"

"You're drunk," said Purvis, still between us. "I saw you take a neat
tumblerful since you come in, and it's made you drunk as a fool.  Pull
yourself together, old man.  You ain't a-going to do what you'll be
sorry for."

"Then I won't shoot at him, I'll only shoot roun' an' roun' the beggar.
You're quite right, ole feller.  Wouldn't hurt him.  Great mishtake.
Roun' an' roun'.  There--like that!"

His freckled paw shot up over Purvis's shoulder, mauve lightning came
from his ring, a red flash from his revolver, and shrieks from the
women as the reverberations died away.  Some splinters lodged in my
hair.

Next instant the prize-fighter disarmed him; and I was safe from the
devil, but finally doomed to the deep sea.  A policeman was in our
midst. He had entered through the drawing-room window; he was an
officer of few words and creditable promptitude.  In a twinkling he had
the handcuffs on my wrists, while the pugilist explained the situation,
and his patron reviled the force and its representative with impotent
malignity.  A fine watch they kept; a lot of good they did; coming in
when all was over and the whole household might have been murdered in
their sleep.  The officer only deigned to notice him as he marched me
off.

"We know all about YOU, sir," said he contemptuously, and he refused
the sovereign Purvis proffered.  "You will be seeing me again, sir, at
Marylebone."

"Shall I come now?"

"As you please, sir.  I rather think the other gentleman requires you
more, and I don't fancy this young man means to give much trouble."

"Oh, I'm coming quietly," I said.

And I went.

In silence we traversed perhaps a hundred yards. It must have been
midnight.  We did not meet a soul.  At last I whispered:

"How on earth did you manage it?"

"Purely by luck," said Raffles.  "I had the luck to get clear away
through knowing every brick of those back-garden walls, and the double
luck to have these togs with the rest over at Chelsea.  The helmet is
one of a collection I made up at Oxford; here it goes over this wall,
and we'd better carry the coat and belt before we meet a real officer.
I got them once for a fancy ball--ostensibly--and thereby hangs a yarn.
I always thought they might come in useful a second time.  My chief
crux to-night was getting rid of the hansom that brought me back.  I
sent him off to Scotland Yard with ten bob and a special message to
good old Mackenzie.  The whole detective department will be at
Rosenthall's in about half an hour.  Of course, I speculated on our
gentleman's hatred of the police--another huge slice of luck.  If you'd
got away, well and good; if not, I felt he was the man to play with his
mouse as long as possible. Yes, Bunny, it's been more of a costume
piece than I intended, and we've come out of it with a good deal less
credit.  But, by Jove, we're jolly lucky to have come out of it at all!"



GENTLEMEN AND PLAYERS

Old Raffles may or may not have been an exceptional criminal, but as a
cricketer I dare swear he was unique.  Himself a dangerous bat, a
brilliant field, and perhaps the very finest slow bowler of his decade,
he took incredibly little interest in the game at large.  He never went
up to Lord's without his cricket-bag, or showed the slightest interest
in the result of a match in which he was not himself engaged.  Nor was
this mere hateful egotism on his part.  He professed to have lost all
enthusiasm for the game, and to keep it up only from the very lowest
motives.

"Cricket," said Raffles, "like everything else, is good enough sport
until you discover a better.  As a source of excitement it isn't in it
with other things you wot of, Bunny, and the involuntary comparison
becomes a bore.  What's the satisfaction of taking a man's wicket when
you want his spoons?  Still, if you can bowl a bit your low cunning
won't get rusty, and always looking for the weak spot's just the kind
of mental exercise one wants.  Yes, perhaps there's some affinity
between the two things after all.  But I'd chuck up cricket to-morrow,
Bunny, if it wasn't for the glorious protection it affords a person of
my proclivities."

"How so?" said I.  "It brings you before the public, I should have
thought, far more than is either safe or wise."

"My dear Bunny, that's exactly where you make a mistake.  To follow
Crime with reasonable impunity you simply MUST have a parallel,
ostensible career--the more public the better.  The principle is
obvious.  Mr. Peace, of pious memory, disarmed suspicion by acquiring a
local reputation for playing the fiddle and taming animals, and it's my
profound conviction that Jack the Ripper was a really eminent public
man, whose speeches were very likely reported alongside his atrocities.
Fill the bill in some prominent part, and you'll never be suspected of
doubling it with another of equal prominence.  That's why I want you to
cultivate journalism, my boy, and sign all you can.  And it's the one
and only reason why I don't burn my bats for firewood."

Nevertheless, when he did play there was no keener performer on the
field, nor one more anxious to do well for his side.  I remember how he
went to the nets, before the first match of the season, with his pocket
full of sovereigns, which he put on the stumps instead of bails.  It
was a sight to see the professionals bowling like demons for the hard
cash, for whenever a stump was hit a pound was tossed to the bowler and
another balanced in its stead, while one man took #3 with a ball that
spreadeagled the wicket.  Raffles's practice cost him either eight or
nine sovereigns; but he had absolutely first-class bowling all the
time; and he made fifty-seven runs next day.

It became my pleasure to accompany him to all his matches, to watch
every ball he bowled, or played, or fielded, and to sit chatting with
him in the pavilion when he was doing none of these three things.  You
might have seen us there, side by side, during the greater part of the
Gentlemen's first innings against the Players (who had lost the toss)
on the second Monday in July.  We were to be seen, but not heard, for
Raffles had failed to score, and was uncommonly cross for a player who
cared so little for the game.  Merely taciturn with me, he was
positively rude to more than one member who wanted to know how it had
happened, or who ventured to commiserate him on his luck; there he sat,
with a straw hat tilted over his nose and a cigarette stuck between
lips that curled disagreeably at every advance.  I was therefore much
surprised when a young fellow of the exquisite type came and squeezed
himself in between us, and met with a perfectly civil reception despite
the liberty.  I did not know the boy by sight, nor did Raffles
introduce us; but their conversation proclaimed at once a slightness of
acquaintanceship and a license on the lad's part which combined to
puzzle me.  Mystification reached its height when Raffles was informed
that the other's father was anxious to meet him, and he instantly
consented to gratify that whim.

"He's in the Ladies' Enclosure.  Will you come round now?"

"With pleasure," says Raffles.  "Keep a place for me, Bunny."

And they were gone.

"Young Crowley," said some voice further back.  "Last year's Harrow
Eleven."

"I remember him.  Worst man in the team."

"Keen cricketer, however.  Stopped till he was twenty to get his
colors.  Governor made him.  Keen breed.  Oh, pretty, sir!  Very
pretty!"

The game was boring me.  I only came to see old Raffles perform.  Soon
I was looking wistfully for his return, and at length I saw him
beckoning me from the palings to the right.

"Want to introduce you to old Amersteth," he whispered, when I joined
him.  "They've a cricket week next month, when this boy Crowley comes
of age, and we've both got to go down and play."

"Both!" I echoed.  "But I'm no cricketer!"

"Shut up," says Raffles.  "Leave that to me. I've been lying for all
I'm worth," he added sepulchrally as we reached the bottom of the
steps. "I trust to you not to give the show away."

There was a gleam in his eye that I knew well enough elsewhere, but was
unprepared for in those healthy, sane surroundings; and it was with
very definite misgivings and surmises that I followed the Zingari
blazer through the vast flower-bed of hats and bonnets that bloomed
beneath the ladies' awning.

Lord Amersteth was a fine-looking man with a short mustache and a
double chin.  He received me with much dry courtesy, through which,
however, it was not difficult to read a less flattering tale.  I was
accepted as the inevitable appendage of the invaluable Raffles, with
whom I felt deeply incensed as I made my bow.

"I have been bold enough," said Lord Amersteth, "to ask one of the
Gentlemen of England to come down and play some rustic cricket for us
next month.  He is kind enough to say that he would have liked nothing
better, but for this little fishing expedition of yours, Mr.-----,
Mr.-----," and Lord Amersteth succeeded in remembering my name.

It was, of course, the first I had ever heard of that fishing
expedition, but I made haste to say that it could easily, and should
certainly, be put off.  Raffles gleamed approval through his eyelashes.
Lord Amersteth bowed and shrugged.

"You're very good, I'm sure," said he.  "But I understand you're a
cricketer yourself?"

"He was one at school," said Raffles, with infamous readiness.

"Not a real cricketer," I was stammering meanwhile.

"In the eleven?" said Lord Amersteth.

"I'm afraid not," said I.

"But only just out of it," declared Raffles, to my horror.

"Well, well, we can't all play for the Gentlemen," said Lord Amersteth
slyly.  "My son Crowley only just scraped into the eleven at Harrow,
and HE'S going to play.  I may even come in myself at a pinch; so you
won't be the only duffer, if you are one, and I shall be very glad if
you will come down and help us too.  You shall flog a stream before
breakfast and after dinner, if you like."

"I should be very proud," I was beginning, as the mere prelude to
resolute excuses; but the eye of Raffles opened wide upon me; and I
hesitated weakly, to be duly lost.

"Then that's settled," said Lord Amersteth, with the slightest
suspicion of grimness.  "It's to be a little week, you know, when my
son comes of age.  We play the Free Foresters, the Dorsetshire
Gentlemen, and probably some local lot as well. But Mr. Raffles will
tell you all about it, and Crowley shall write.  Another wicket!  By
Jove, they're all out!  Then I rely on you both." And, with a little
nod, Lord Amersteth rose and sidled to the gangway.

Raffles rose also, but I caught the sleeve of his blazer.

"What are you thinking of?" I whispered savagely.  "I was nowhere near
the eleven.  I'm no sort of cricketer.  I shall have to get out of
this!"

"Not you," he whispered back.  "You needn't play, but come you must.
If you wait for me after half-past six I'll tell you why."

But I could guess the reason; and I am ashamed to say that it revolted
me much less than did the notion of making a public fool of myself on a
cricket-field.  My gorge rose at this as it no longer rose at crime,
and it was in no tranquil humor that I strolled about the ground while
Raffles disappeared in the pavilion.  Nor was my annoyance lessened by
a little meeting I witnessed between young Crowley and his father, who
shrugged as he stopped and stooped to convey some information which
made the young man look a little blank. It may have been pure
self-consciousness on my part, but I could have sworn that the trouble
was their inability to secure the great Raffles without his
insignificant friend.

Then the bell rang, and I climbed to the top of the pavilion to watch
Raffles bowl.  No subtleties are lost up there; and if ever a bowler
was full of them, it was A. J. Raffles on this day, as, indeed, all the
cricket world remembers.  One had not to be a cricketer oneself to
appreciate his perfect command of pitch and break, his beautifully easy
action, which never varied with the varying pace, his great ball on the
leg-stump--his dropping head-ball--in a word, the infinite ingenuity of
that versatile attack.  It was no mere exhibition of athletic prowess,
it was an intellectual treat, and one with a special significance in my
eyes.  I saw the "affinity between the two things," saw it in that
afternoon's tireless warfare against the flower of professional
cricket.  It was not that Raffles took many wickets for few runs; he
was too fine a bowler to mind being hit; and time was short, and the
wicket good.  What I admired, and what I remember, was the combination
of resource and cunning, of patience and precision, of head-work and
handiwork, which made every over an artistic whole.  It was all so
characteristic of that other Raffles whom I alone knew!

"I felt like bowling this afternoon," he told me later in the hansom.
"With a pitch to help me, I'd have done something big; as it is, three
for forty-one, out of the four that fell, isn't so bad for a slow
bowler on a plumb wicket against those fellows.  But I felt venomous!
Nothing riles me more than being asked about for my cricket as though I
were a pro. myself."

"Then why on earth go?"

"To punish them, and--because we shall be jolly hard up, Bunny, before
the season's over!"

"Ah!" said I.  "I thought it was that."

"Of course, it was!  It seems they're going to have the very devil of a
week of it--balls--dinner parties--swagger house party--general
junketings--and obviously a houseful of diamonds as well.  Diamonds
galore!  As a general rule nothing would induce me to abuse my position
as a guest.  I've never done it, Bunny.  But in this case we're engaged
like the waiters and the band, and by heaven we'll take our toll!
Let's have a quiet dinner somewhere and talk it over."

"It seems rather a vulgar sort of theft," I could not help saying; and
to this, my single protest, Raffles instantly assented.

"It is a vulgar sort," said he; "but I can't help that.  We're getting
vulgarly hard up again, and there's an end on 't.  Besides, these
people deserve it, and can afford it.  And don't you run away with the
idea that all will be plain sailing; nothing will be easier than
getting some stuff, and nothing harder than avoiding all suspicion, as,
of course, we must.  We may come away with no more than a good working
plan of the premises.  Who knows?  In any case there's weeks of
thinking in it for you and me."

But with those weeks I will not weary you further than by remarking
that the "thinking," was done entirely by Raffles, who did not always
trouble to communicate his thoughts to me.  His reticence, however, was
no longer an irritant.  I began to accept it as a necessary convention
of these little enterprises.  And, after our last adventure of the
kind, more especially after its denouement, my trust in Raffles was
much too solid to be shaken by a want of trust in me, which I still
believe to have been more the instinct of the criminal than the
judgment of the man.

It was on Monday, the tenth of August, that we were due at Milchester
Abbey, Dorset; and the beginning of the month found us cruising about
that very county, with fly-rods actually in our hands.  The idea was
that we should acquire at once a local reputation as decent fishermen,
and some knowledge of the countryside, with a view to further and more
deliberate operations in the event of an unprofitable week.  There was
another idea which Raffles kept to himself until he had got me down
there.  Then one day he produced a cricket-ball in a meadow we were
crossing, and threw me catches for an hour together.  More hours he
spent in bowling to me on the nearest green; and, if I was never a
cricketer, at least I came nearer to being one, by the end of that
week, than ever before or since.

Incident began early on the Monday.  We had sallied forth from a
desolate little junction within quite a few miles of Milchester, had
been caught in a shower, had run for shelter to a wayside inn. A
florid, overdressed man was drinking in the parlor, and I could have
sworn it was at the sight of him that Raffles recoiled on the
threshold, and afterwards insisted on returning to the station through
the rain.  He assured me, however, that the odor of stale ale had
almost knocked him down.  And I had to make what I could of his
speculative, downcast eyes and knitted brows.

Milchester Abbey is a gray, quadrangular pile, deep-set in rich woody
country, and twinkling with triple rows of quaint windows, every one of
which seemed alight as we drove up just in time to dress for dinner.
The carriage had whirled us under I know not how many triumphal arches
in process of construction, and past the tents and flag-poles of a
juicy-looking cricket-field, on which Raffles undertook to bowl up to
his reputation.  But the chief signs of festival were within, where we
found an enormous house-party assembled, including more persons of
pomp, majesty, and dominion than I had ever encountered in one room
before.  I confess I felt overpowered.  Our errand and my own presences
combined to rob me of an address upon which I have sometimes plumed
myself; and I have a grim recollection of my nervous relief when dinner
was at last announced.  I little knew what an ordeal it was to prove.

I had taken in a much less formidable young lady than might have fallen
to my lot.  Indeed I began by blessing my good fortune in this respect.
Miss Melhuish was merely the rector's daughter, and she had only been
asked to make an even number.  She informed me of both facts before the
soup reached us, and her subsequent conversation was characterized by
the same engaging candor. It exposed what was little short of a mania
for imparting information.  I had simply to listen, to nod, and to be
thankful.

When I confessed to knowing very few of those present, even by sight,
my entertaining companion proceeded to tell me who everybody was,
beginning on my left and working conscientiously round to her right.
This lasted quite a long time, and really interested me; but a great
deal that followed did not, and, obviously to recapture my unworthy
attention, Miss Melhuish suddenly asked me, in a sensational whisper,
whether I could keep a secret.

I said I thought I might, whereupon another question followed, in still
lower and more thrilling accents:

"Are you afraid of burglars?"

Burglars!  I was roused at last.  The word stabbed me.  I repeated it
in horrified query.

"So I've found something to interest you at last!" said Miss Melhuish,
in naive triumph. "Yes--burglars!  But don't speak so loud.  It's
supposed to be kept a great secret.  I really oughtn't to tell you at
all!"

"But what is there to tell?" I whispered with satisfactory impatience.

"You promise not to speak of it?"

"Of course!"

"Well, then, there are burglars in the neighborhood."

"Have they committed any robberies?"

"Not yet."

"Then how do you know?"

"They've been seen.  In the district.  Two well-known London thieves!"

Two!  I looked at Raffles.  I had done so often during the evening,
envying him his high spirits, his iron nerve, his buoyant wit, his
perfect ease and self-possession.  But now I pitied him; through all my
own terror and consternation, I pitied him as he sat eating and
drinking, and laughing and talking, without a cloud of fear or of
embarrassment on his handsome, taking, daredevil face.  I caught up my
champagne and emptied the glass.

"Who has seen them?" I then asked calmly.

"A detective.  They were traced down from town a few days ago.  They
are believed to have designs on the Abbey!"

"But why aren't they run in?"

"Exactly what I asked papa on the way here this evening; he says there
is no warrant out against the men at present, and all that can be done
is to watch their movements."

"Oh! so they are being watched?"

"Yes, by a detective who is down here on purpose.  And I heard Lord
Amersteth tell papa that they had been seen this afternoon at Warbeck
Junction!"

The very place where Raffles and I had been caught in the rain!  Our
stampede from the inn was now explained; on the other hand, I was no
longer to be taken by surprise by anything that my companion might have
to tell me; and I succeeded in looking her in the face with a smile.

"This is really quite exciting, Miss Melhuish," said I.  "May I ask how
you come to know so much about it?"

"It's papa," was the confidential reply.  "Lord Amersteth consulted
him, and he consulted me. But for goodness' sake don't let it get
about!  I can't think WHAT tempted me to tell you!"

"You may trust me, Miss Melhuish.  But--aren't you frightened?"

Miss Melhuish giggled.

"Not a bit!  They won't come to the rectory. There's nothing for them
there.  But look round the table: look at the diamonds: look at old
Lady Melrose's necklace alone!"

The Dowager Marchioness of Melrose was one of the few persons whom it
had been unnecessary to point out to me.  She sat on Lord Amersteth's
right, flourishing her ear-trumpet, and drinking champagne with her
usual notorious freedom, as dissipated and kindly a dame as the world
has ever seen.  It was a necklace of diamonds and sapphires that rose
and fell about her ample neck.

"They say it's worth five thousand pounds at least," continued my
companion.  "Lady Margaret told me so this morning (that's Lady
Margaret next your Mr. Raffles, you know); and the old dear WILL wear
them every night.  Think what a haul they would be!  No; we don't feel
in immediate danger at the rectory."

When the ladies rose, Miss Melhuish bound me to fresh vows of secrecy;
and left me, I should think, with some remorse for her indiscretion,
but more satisfaction at the importance which it had undoubtedly given
her in my eyes.  The opinion may smack of vanity, though, in reality,
the very springs of conversation reside in that same human, universal
itch to thrill the auditor.  The peculiarity of Miss Melhuish was that
she must be thrilling at all costs.  And thrilling she had surely been.

I spare you my feelings of the next two hours. I tried hard to get a
word with Raffles, but again and again I failed.  In the dining-room he
and Crowley lit their cigarettes with the same match, and had their
heads together all the time.  In the drawing-room I had the
mortification of hearing him talk interminable nonsense into the
ear-trumpet of Lady Melrose, whom he knew in town.  Lastly, in the
billiard-room, they had a great and lengthy pool, while I sat aloof and
chafed more than ever in the company of a very serious Scotchman, who
had arrived since dinner, and who would talk of nothing but the recent
improvements in instantaneous photography.  He had not come to play in
the matches (he told me), but to obtain for Lord Amersteth such a
series of cricket photographs as had never been taken before; whether
as an amateur or a professional photographer I was unable to determine.
I remember, however, seeking distraction in little bursts of resolute
attention to the conversation of this bore.  And so at last the long
ordeal ended; glasses were emptied, men said good-night, and I followed
Raffles to his room.

"It's all up!" I gasped, as he turned up the gas and I shut the door.
"We're being watched. We've been followed down from town.  There's a
detective here on the spot!"

"How do YOU know?" asked Raffles, turning upon me quite sharply, but
without the least dismay.  And I told him how I knew.

"Of course," I added, "it was the fellow we saw in the inn this
afternoon."

"The detective?" said Raffles.  "Do you mean to say you don't know a
detective when you see one, Bunny?"

"If that wasn't the fellow, which is?"

Raffles shook his head.

"To think that you've been talking to him for the last hour in the
billiard-room and couldn't spot what he was!"

"The Scotch photographer--"

I paused aghast.

"Scotch he is," said Raffles, "and photographer he may be.  He is also
Inspector Mackenzie of Scotland Yard--the very man I sent the message
to that night last April.  And you couldn't spot who he was in a whole
hour! O Bunny, Bunny, you were never built for crime!"

"But," said I, "if that was Mackenzie, who was the fellow you bolted
from at Warbeck?"

"The man he's watching."

"But he's watching us!"

Raffles looked at me with a pitying eye, and shook his head again
before handing me his open cigarette-case.

"I don't know whether smoking's forbidden in one's bedroom, but you'd
better take one of these and stand tight, Bunny, because I'm going to
say something offensive."

I helped myself with a laugh.

"Say what you like, my dear fellow, if it really isn't you and I that
Mackenzie's after."

"Well, then, it isn't, and it couldn't be, and nobody but a born Bunny
would suppose for a moment that it was!  Do you seriously think he
would sit there and knowingly watch his man playing pool under his
nose?  Well, he might; he's a cool hand, Mackenzie; but I'm not cool
enough to win a pool under such conditions.  At least I don't think I
am; it would be interesting to see.  The situation wasn't free from
strain as it was, though I knew he wasn't thinking of us.  Crowley told
me all about it after dinner, you see, and then I'd seen one of the men
for myself this afternoon. You thought it was a detective who made me
turn tail at that inn.  I really don't know why I didn't tell you at
the time, but it was just the opposite. That loud, red-faced brute is
one of the cleverest thieves in London, and I once had a drink with him
and our mutual fence.  I was an Eastender from tongue to toe at the
moment, but you will understand that I don't run unnecessary risks of
recognition by a brute like that."

"He's not alone, I hear."

"By no means; there's at least one other man with him; and it's
suggested that there may be an accomplice here in the house."

"Did Lord Crowley tell you so?"

"Crowley and the champagne between them.  In confidence, of course,
just as your girl told you; but even in confidence he never let on
about Mackenzie.  He told me there was a detective in the background,
but that was all.  Putting him up as a guest is evidently their big
secret, to be kept from the other guests because it might offend them,
but more particularly from the servants whom he's here to watch.
That's my reading of the situation, Bunny, and you will agree with me
that it's infinitely more interesting than we could have imagined it
would prove."

"But infinitely more difficult for us," said I, with a sigh of
pusillanimous relief.  "Our hands are tied for this week, at all
events."

"Not necessarily, my dear Bunny, though I admit that the chances are
against us.  Yet I'm not so sure of that either.  There are all sorts
of possibilities in these three-cornered combinations.  Set A to watch
B, and he won't have an eye left for C.  That's the obvious theory, but
then Mackenzie's a very big A.  I should be sorry to have any boodle
about me with that man in the house.  Yet it would be great to nip in
between A and B and score off them both at once!  It would be worth a
risk, Bunny, to do that; it would be worth risking something merely to
take on old hands like B and his men at their own old game!  Eh, Bunny?
That would be something like a match. Gentlemen and Players at single
wicket, by Jove!"

His eyes were brighter than I had known them for many a day.  They
shone with the perverted enthusiasm which was roused in him only by the
contemplation of some new audacity.  He kicked off his shoes and began
pacing his room with noiseless rapidity; not since the night of the Old
Bohemian dinner to Reuben Rosenthall had Raffles exhibited such
excitement in my presence; and I was not sorry at the moment to be
reminded of the fiasco to which that banquet had been the prelude.

"My dear A. J.," said I in his very own tone, "you're far too fond of
the uphill game; you will eventually fall a victim to the sporting
spirit and nothing else.  Take a lesson from our last escape, and fly
lower as you value our skins.  Study the house as much as you like, but
do--not--go and shove your head into Mackenzie's mouth!"

My wealth of metaphor brought him to a stand-still, with his cigarette
between his fingers and a grin beneath his shining eyes.

"You're quite right, Bunny.  I won't.  I really won't.  Yet--you saw
old Lady Melrose's necklace?  I've been wanting it for years!  But I'm
not going to play the fool; honor bright, I'm not; yet--by Jove!--to
get to windward of the professors and Mackenzie too!  It would be a
great game, Bunny, it would be a great game!"

"Well, you mustn't play it this week."

"No, no, I won't.  But I wonder how the professors think of going to
work?  That's what one wants to know.  I wonder if they've really got
an accomplice in the house?  How I wish I knew their game!  But it's
all right, Bunny; don't you be jealous; it shall be as you wish."

And with that assurance I went off to my own room, and so to bed with
an incredibly light heart. I had still enough of the honest man in me
to welcome the postponement of our actual felonies, to dread their
performance, to deplore their necessity: which is merely another way of
stating the too patent fact that I was an incomparably weaker man than
Raffles, while every whit as wicked.

I had, however, one rather strong point.  I possessed the gift of
dismissing unpleasant considerations, not intimately connected with the
passing moment, entirely from my mind.  Through the exercise of this
faculty I had lately been living my frivolous life in town with as much
ignoble enjoyment as I had derived from it the year before; and
similarly, here at Milchester, in the long-dreaded cricket-week, I had
after all a quite excellent time.

It is true that there were other factors in this pleasing
disappointment.  In the first place, mirabile dictu, there were one or
two even greater duffers than I on the Abbey cricket-field.  Indeed,
quite early in the week, when it was of most value to me, I gained
considerable kudos for a lucky catch; a ball, of which I had merely
heard the hum, stuck fast in my hand, which Lord Amersteth himself
grasped in public congratulation.  This happy accident was not to be
undone even by me, and, as nothing succeeds like success, and the
constant encouragement of the one great cricketer on the field was in
itself an immense stimulus, I actually made a run or two in my very
next innings.  Miss Melhuish said pretty things to me that night at the
great ball in honor of Viscount Crowley's majority; she also told me
that was the night on which the robbers would assuredly make their
raid, and was full of arch tremors when we sat out in the garden,
though the entire premises were illuminated all night long.  Meanwhile
the quiet Scotchman took countless photographs by day, which he
developed by night in a dark room admirably situated in the servants'
part of the house; and it is my firm belief that only two of his
fellow-guests knew Mr. Clephane of Dundee for Inspector Mackenzie of
Scotland Yard.

The week was to end with a trumpery match on the Saturday, which two or
three of us intended abandoning early in order to return to town that
night.  The match, however, was never played.  In the small hours of
the Saturday morning a tragedy took place at Milchester Abbey.

Let me tell of the thing as I saw and heard it.  My room opened upon
the central gallery, and was not even on the same floor as that on
which Raffles--and I think all the other men--were quartered.  I had
been put, in fact, into the dressing-room of one of the grand suites,
and my too near neighbors were old Lady Melrose and my host and
hostess.  Now, by the Friday evening the actual festivities were at an
end, and, for the first time that week, I must have been sound asleep
since midnight, when all at once I found myself sitting up breathless.
A heavy thud had come against my door, and now I heard hard breathing
and the dull stamp of muffled feet.

"I've got ye," muttered a voice.  "It's no use struggling."

It was the Scotch detective, and a new fear turned me cold.  There was
no reply, but the hard breathing grew harder still, and the muffled
feet beat the floor to a quicker measure.  In sudden panic I sprang out
of bed and flung open my door. A light burnt low on the landing, and by
it I could see Mackenzie swaying and staggering in a silent tussle with
some powerful adversary.

"Hold this man!" he cried, as I appeared. "Hold the rascal!"

But I stood like a fool until the pair of them backed into me, when,
with a deep breath I flung myself on the fellow, whose face I had seen
at last. He was one of the footmen who waited at table; and no sooner
had I pinned him than the detective loosed his hold.

"Hang on to him," he cried.  "There's more of 'em below."

And he went leaping down the stairs, as other doors opened and Lord
Amersteth and his son appeared simultaneously in their pyjamas.  At
that my man ceased struggling; but I was still holding him when Crowley
turned up the gas.

"What the devil's all this?" asked Lord Amersteth, blinking.  "Who was
that ran downstairs?"

"Mac--Clephane!" said I hastily.

"Aha!" said he, turning to the footman.  "So you're the scoundrel, are
you?  Well done!  Well done!  Where was he caught?"

I had no idea.

"Here's Lady Melrose's door open," said Crowley.  "Lady Melrose!  Lady
Melrose!"

"You forget she's deaf," said Lord Amersteth. "Ah! that'll be her maid."

An inner door had opened; next instant there was a little shriek, and a
white figure gesticulated on the threshold.

"Ou donc est l'ecrin de Madame la Marquise?  La fenetre est ouverte.
Il a disparu!"

"Window open and jewel-case gone, by Jove!" exclaimed Lord Amersteth.
"Mais comment est Madame la Marquise?  Est elle bien?"

"Oui, milor.  Elle dort."

"Sleeps through it all," said my lord.  "She's the only one, then!"

"What made Mackenzie--Clephane--bolt?" young Crowley asked me.

"Said there were more of them below."

"Why the devil couldn't you tell us so before?" he cried, and went
leaping downstairs in his turn.

He was followed by nearly all the cricketers, who now burst upon the
scene in a body, only to desert it for the chase.  Raffles was one of
them, and I would gladly have been another, had not the footman chosen
this moment to hurl me from him, and to make a dash in the direction
from which they had come.  Lord Amersteth had him in an instant; but
the fellow fought desperately, and it took the two of us to drag him
downstairs, amid a terrified chorus from half-open doors.  Eventually
we handed him over to two other footmen who appeared with their
nightshirts tucked into their trousers, and my host was good enough to
compliment me as he led the way outside.

"I thought I heard a shot," he added.  "Didn't you?"

"I thought I heard three."

And out we dashed into the darkness.

I remember how the gravel pricked my feet, how the wet grass numbed
them as we made for the sound of voices on an outlying lawn.  So dark
was the night that we were in the cricketers' midst before we saw the
shimmer of their pyjamas; and then Lord Amersteth almost trod on
Mackenzie as he lay prostrate in the dew.

"Who's this?" he cried.  "What on earth's happened?"

"It's Clephane," said a man who knelt over him.  "He's got a bullet in
him somewhere."

"Is he alive?"

"Barely."

"Good God!  Where's Crowley?"

"Here I am," called a breathless voice.  "It's no good, you fellows.
There's nothing to show which way they've gone.  Here's Raffles; he's
chucked it, too."  And they ran up panting.

"Well, we've got one of them, at all events," muttered Lord Amersteth.
"The next thing is to get this poor fellow indoors.  Take his
shoulders, somebody.  Now his middle.  Join hands under him.  All
together, now; that's the way.  Poor fellow!  Poor fellow!  His name
isn't Clephane at all.  He's a Scotland Yard detective, down here for
these very villains!"

Raffles was the first to express surprise; but he had also been the
first to raise the wounded man.  Nor had any of them a stronger or more
tender hand in the slow procession to the house.

In a little we had the senseless man stretched on a sofa in the
library.  And there, with ice on his wound and brandy in his throat,
his eyes opened and his lips moved.

Lord Amersteth bent down to catch the words.

"Yes, yes," said he; "we've got one of them safe and sound.  The brute
you collared upstairs." Lord Amersteth bent lower.  "By Jove!  Lowered
the jewel-case out of the window, did he?  And they've got clean away
with it!  Well, well!  I only hope we'll be able to pull this good
fellow through.  He's off again."

An hour passed: the sun was rising.

It found a dozen young fellows on the settees in the billiard-room,
drinking whiskey and soda-water in their overcoats and pyjamas, and
still talking excitedly in one breath.  A time-table was being passed
from hand to hand: the doctor was still in the library.  At last the
door opened, and Lord Amersteth put in his head.

"It isn't hopeless," said he, "but it's bad enough. There'll be no
cricket to-day."

Another hour, and most of us were on our way to catch the early train;
between us we filled a compartment almost to suffocation.  And still we
talked all together of the night's event; and still I was a little hero
in my way, for having kept my hold of the one ruffian who had been
taken; and my gratification was subtle and intense.  Raffles watched me
under lowered lids.  Not a word had we had together; not a word did we
have until we had left the others at Paddington, and were skimming
through the streets in a hansom with noiseless tires and a tinkling
bell.

"Well, Bunny," said Raffles, "so the professors have it, eh?"

"Yes," said I.  "And I'm jolly glad!"

"That poor Mackenzie has a ball in his chest?"

"That you and I have been on the decent side for once."

He shrugged his shoulders.

"You're hopeless, Bunny, quite hopeless!  I take it you wouldn't have
refused your share if the boodle had fallen to us?  Yet you positively
enjoy coming off second best--for the second time running!  I confess,
however, that the professors' methods were full of interest to me.  I,
for one, have probably gained as much in experience as I have lost in
other things.  That lowering the jewel-case out of the window was a
very simple and effective expedient; two of them had been waiting below
for it for hours."

"How do you know?" I asked.

"I saw them from my own window, which was just above the dear old
lady's.  I was fretting for that necklace in particular, when I went up
to turn in for our last night--and I happened to look out of my window.
In point of fact, I wanted to see whether the one below was open, and
whether there was the slightest chance of working the oracle with my
sheet for a rope.  Of course I took the precaution of turning my light
off first, and it was a lucky thing I did.  I saw the pros. right down
below, and they never saw me.  I saw a little tiny luminous disk just
for an instant, and then again for an instant a few minutes later.  Of
course I knew what it was, for I have my own watch-dial daubed with
luminous paint; it makes a lantern of sorts when you can get no better.
But these fellows were not using theirs as a lantern.  They were under
the old lady's window.  They were watching the time.  The whole thing
was arranged with their accomplice inside.  Set a thief to catch a
thief: in a minute I had guessed what the whole thing proved to be."

"And you did nothing!" I exclaimed.

"On the contrary, I went downstairs and straight into Lady Melrose's
room--"

"You did?"

"Without a moment's hesitation.  To save her jewels.  And I was
prepared to yell as much into her ear-trumpet for all the house to
hear.  But the dear lady is too deaf and too fond of her dinner to wake
easily."

"Well?"

"She didn't stir."

"And yet you allowed the professors, as you call them, to take her
jewels, case and all!"

"All but this," said Raffles, thrusting his fist into my lap.  "I would
have shown it you before, but really, old fellow, your face all day has
been worth a fortune to the firm!"

And he opened his fist, to shut it next instant on the bunch of
diamonds and of sapphires that I had last seen encircling the neck of
Lady Melrose.



LE PREMIER PAS

That night he told me the story of his earliest crime.  Not since the
fateful morning of the Ides of March, when he had just mentioned it as
an unreported incident of a certain cricket tour, had I succeeded in
getting a word out of Raffles on the subject.  It was not for want of
trying; he would shake his head, and watch his cigarette smoke
thoughtfully; a subtle look in his eyes, half cynical, half wistful, as
though the decent honest days that were no more had had their merits
after all.  Raffles would plan a fresh enormity, or glory in the last,
with the unmitigated enthusiasm of the artist.  It was impossible to
imagine one throb or twitter of compunction beneath those frankly
egotistic and infectious transports.  And yet the ghost of a dead
remorse seemed still to visit him with the memory of his first felony,
so that I had given the story up long before the night of our return
from Milchester.  Cricket, however, was in the air, and Raffles's
cricket-bag back where he sometimes kept it, in the fender, with the
remains of an Orient label still adhering to the leather.  My eyes had
been on this label for some time, and I suppose his eyes had been on
mine, for all at once he asked me if I still burned to hear that yarn.

"It's no use," I replied.  "You won't spin it. I must imagine it for
myself."

"How can you?"

"Oh, I begin to know your methods."

"You take it I went in with my eyes open, as I do now, eh?"

"I can't imagine your doing otherwise."

"My dear Bunny, it was the most unpremeditated thing I ever did in my
life!"

His chair wheeled back into the books as he sprang up with sudden
energy.  There was quite an indignant glitter in his eyes.

"I can't believe that," said I craftily.  "I can't pay you such a poor
compliment!"

"Then you must be a fool--"

He broke off, stared hard at me, and in a trice stood smiling in his
own despite.

"Or a better knave than I thought you, Bunny, and by Jove it's the
knave!  Well--I suppose I'm fairly drawn; I give you best, as they say
out there.  As a matter of fact I've been thinking of the thing myself;
last night's racket reminds me of it in one or two respects.  I tell
you what, though, this is an occasion in any case, and I'm going to
celebrate it by breaking the one good rule of my life.  I'm going to
have a second drink!"

The whiskey tinkled, the syphon fizzed, the ice plopped home; and
seated there in his pyjamas, with the inevitable cigarette, Raffles
told me the story that I had given up hoping to hear.  The windows were
wide open; the sounds of Piccadilly floated in at first.  Long before
he finished, the last wheels had rattled, the last brawler was removed,
we alone broke the quiet of the summer night.


"... No, they do you very well, indeed. You pay for nothing but drinks,
so to speak, but I'm afraid mine were of a comprehensive character.  I
had started in a hole, I ought really to have refused the invitation;
then we all went to the Melbourne Cup, and I had the certain winner
that didn't win, and that's not the only way you can play the fool in
Melbourne.  I wasn't the steady old stager I am now, Bunny; my analysis
was a confession in itself.  But the others didn't know how hard up I
was, and I swore they shouldn't.  I tried the Jews, but they're extra
fly out there. Then I thought of a kinsman of sorts, a second cousin of
my father's whom none of us knew anything about, except that he was
supposed to be in one or other of the Colonies.  If he was a rich man,
well and good, I would work him; if not there would be no harm done.  I
tried to get on his tracks, and, as luck would have it, I succeeded (or
thought I had) at the very moment when I happened to have a few days to
myself.  I was cut over on the hand, just before the big Christmas
match, and couldn't have bowled a ball if they had played me.

"The surgeon who fixed me up happened to ask me if I was any relation
of Raffles of the National Bank, and the pure luck of it almost took my
breath away.  A relation who was a high official in one of the banks,
who would finance me on my mere name--could anything be better?  I made
up my mind that this Raffles was the man I wanted, and was awfully sold
to find next moment that he wasn't a high official at all.  Nor had the
doctor so much as met him, but had merely read of him in connection
with a small sensation at the suburban branch which my namesake
managed; an armed robber had been rather pluckily beaten off, with a
bullet in him, by this Raffles; and the sort of thing was so common out
there that this was the first I had heard of it!  A suburban branch--my
financier had faded into some excellent fellow with a billet to lose if
he called his soul his own. Still a manager was a manager, and I said I
would soon see whether this was the relative I was looking for, if he
would be good enough to give me the name of that branch.

"'I'll do more,' says the doctor.  'I'll get you the name of the branch
he's been promoted to, for I think I heard they'd moved him up one
already.' And the next day he brought me the name of the township of
Yea, some fifty miles north of Melbourne; but, with the vagueness which
characterized all his information, he was unable to say whether I
should find my relative there or not.

"'He's a single man, and his initials are W. F.,' said the doctor, who
was certain enough of the immaterial points.  'He left his old post
several days ago, but it appears he's not due at the new one till the
New Year.  No doubt he'll go before then to take things over and settle
in.  You might find him up there and you might not.  If I were you I
should write.'

"'That'll lose two days,' said I, 'and more if he isn't there,' for I'd
grown quite keen on this up-country manager, and I felt that if I could
get at him while the holidays were still on, a little conviviality
might help matters considerably.

"'Then,' said the doctor, 'I should get a quiet horse and ride.  You
needn't use that hand.'

"'Can't I go by train?'

"'You can and you can't.  You would still have to ride.  I suppose
you're a horseman?'

"'Yes.'

"'Then I should certainly ride all the way.  It's a delightful road,
through Whittlesea and over the Plenty Ranges.  It'll give you some
idea of the bush, Mr. Raffles, and you'll see the sources of the water
supply of this city, sir.  You'll see where every drop of it comes
from, the pure Yan Yean! I wish I had time to ride with you.'

"'But where can I get a horse?'

"The doctor thought a moment.

"'I've a mare of my own that's as fat as butter for want of work,' said
he.  'It would be a charity to me to sit on her back for a hundred
miles or so, and then I should know you'd have no temptation to use
that hand.'

"'You're far too good!' I protested.

"'You're A. J. Raffles,' he said.

"And if ever there was a prettier compliment, or a finer instance of
even Colonial hospitality, I can only say, Bunny, that I never heard of
either."

He sipped his whiskey, threw away the stump of  his cigarette, and lit
another before continuing.

"Well, I managed to write a line to W. F. with my own hand, which, as
you will gather, was not very badly wounded; it was simply this third
finger that was split and in splints; and next morning the doctor
packed me off on a bovine beast that would have done for an ambulance.
Half the team came up to see me start; the rest were rather sick with
me for not stopping to see the match out, as if I could help them to
win by watching them.  They little knew the game I'd got on myself, but
still less did I know the game I was going to play.

"It was an interesting ride enough, especially after passing the place
called Whittlesea, a real wild township on the lower slope of the
ranges, where I recollect having a deadly meal of hot mutton and tea,
with the thermometer at three figures in the shade.  The first thirty
miles or so was a good metal road, too good to go half round the world
to ride on, but after Whittlesea it was a mere track over the ranges, a
track I often couldn't see and left entirely to the mare.  Now it
dipped into a gully and ran through a creek, and all the time the local
color was inches thick; gum-trees galore and parrots all colors of the
rainbow.  In one place a whole forest of gums had been ring-barked, and
were just as though they had been painted white, without a leaf or a
living thing for miles. And the first living thing I did meet was the
sort to give you the creeps; it was a riderless horse coming full tilt
through the bush, with the saddle twisted round and the stirrup-irons
ringing.  Without thinking, I had a shot at heading him with the
doctor's mare, and blocked him just enough to allow a man who came
galloping after to do the rest.

"'Thank ye, mister,' growled the man, a huge chap in a red checked
shirt, with a beard like W. G. Grace, but the very devil of an
expression.

"'Been an accident?' said I, reining up.

"'Yes,' said he, scowling as though he defied me to ask any more.

"'And a nasty one,' I said, 'if that's blood on the saddle!'

"Well, Bunny, I may be a blackguard myself, but I don't think I ever
looked at a fellow as that chap looked at me.  But I stared him out,
and forced him to admit that it was blood on the twisted saddle, and
after that he became quite tame.  He told me exactly what had happened.
A mate of his had been dragged under a branch, and had his nose
smashed, but that was all; had sat tight after it till he dropped from
loss of blood; another mate was with him back in the bush.

"As I've said already, Bunny, I wasn't the old stager that I am now--in
any respect--and we parted good enough friends.  He asked me which way
I was going, and, when I told him, he said I should save seven miles,
and get a good hour earlier to Yea, by striking off the track and
making for a peak that we could see through the trees, and following a
creek that I should see from the peak.  Don't smile, Bunny!  I began by
saying I was a child in those days.  Of course, the short cut was the
long way round; and it was nearly dark when that unlucky mare and I saw
the single street of Yea.

"I was looking for the bank when a fellow in a white suit ran down from
the veranda.

"'Mr. Raffles?' said he.

"'Mr. Raffles,' said I, laughing as I shook his hand.

"'You're late.'

"'I was misdirected.'

"'That all?  I'm relieved,' he said.  'Do you know what they are
saying?  There are some brand-new bushrangers on the road between
Whittlesea and this--a second Kelly gang!  They'd have caught a Tartar
in you, eh?'

"'They would in you,' I retorted, and my tu quoque shut him up and
seemed to puzzle him. Yet there was much more sense in it than in his
compliment to me, which was absolutely pointless.

"'I'm afraid you'll find things pretty rough,' he resumed, when he had
unstrapped my valise, and handed my reins to his man.  'It's lucky
you're a bachelor like myself.'

"I could not quite see the point of this remark either, since, had I
been married, I should hardly have sprung my wife upon him in this
free-and-easy fashion.  I muttered the conventional sort of thing, and
then he said I should find it all right when I settled, as though I had
come to graze upon him for weeks!  'Well,' thought I, 'these Colonials
do take the cake for hospitality!'  And, still marvelling, I let him
lead me into the private part of the bank.

"'Dinner will be ready in a quarter of an hour,' said he as we entered.
'I thought you might like a tub first, and you'll find all ready in the
room at the end of the passage.  Sing out if there's anything you want.
Your luggage hasn't turned up yet, by the way, but here's a letter that
came this morning.'

"'Not for me?'

"'Yes; didn't you expect one?'

"'I certainly did not!'

"'Well, here it is.'

"And, as he lit me to my room, I read my own superscription of the
previous day--to W. F. Raffles!

"Bunny, you've had your wind bagged at footer, I daresay; you know what
that's like?  All I can say is that my moral wind was bagged by that
letter as I hope, old chap, I have never yet bagged yours. I couldn't
speak.  I could only stand with my own letter in my hands until he had
the good taste to leave me by myself.

"W. F. Raffles!  We had mistaken EACH OTHER for W. F.  Raffles--for the
new manager who had not yet arrived!  Small wonder we had conversed at
cross-purposes; the only wonder was that we had not discovered our
mutual mistake.  How the other man would have laughed!  But I--I could
not laugh.  By Jove, no, it was no laughing matter for me!  I saw the
whole thing in a flash, without a tremor, but with the direst
depression from my own single point of view.  Call it callous if you
like, Bunny, but remember that I was in much the same hole as you've
since been in yourself, and that I had counted on this W. F. Raffles
even as you counted on A. J.  I thought of the man with the W. G.
beard--the riderless horse and the bloody saddle--the deliberate
misdirection that had put me off the track and out of the way--and now
the missing manager and the report of bushrangers at this end.  But I
simply don't pretend to have felt any personal pity for a man whom I
had never seen; that kind of pity's usually cant; and besides, all mine
was needed for myself.

"I was in as big a hole as ever.  What the devil was I to do?  I doubt
if I have sufficiently impressed upon you the absolute necessity of my
returning to Melbourne in funds.  As a matter of fact it was less the
necessity than my own determination which I can truthfully ascribe as
absolute.

"Money I would have--but how--but how?  Would this stranger be open to
persuasion--if I told him the truth?  No; that would set us all
scouring the country for the rest of the night.  Why should I tell him?
Suppose I left him to find out his mistake ... would anything be
gained?  Bunny, I give you my word that I went in to dinner without a
definite intention in my head, or one premeditated lie upon my lips.  I
might do the decent, natural thing, and explain matters without loss of
time; on the other hand, there was no hurry.  I had not opened the
letter, and could always pretend I had not noticed the initials;
meanwhile something might turn up.  I could wait a little and see.
Tempted I already was, but as yet the temptation was vague, and its
very vagueness made me tremble.

"'Bad news, I'm afraid?' said the manager, when at last I sat down at
his table.

"'A mere annoyance,' I answered--I do assure you--on the spur of the
moment and nothing else. But my lie was told; my position was taken;
from that moment onward there was no retreat.  By implication, without
realizing what I was doing, I had already declared myself W. F.
Raffles.  Therefore, W. F. Raffles I would be, in that bank, for that
night.  And the devil teach me how to use my lie!"

Again he raised his glass to his lips--I had forgotten mine.  His
cigarette-case caught the gas-light as he handed it to me.  I shook my
head without taking my eyes from his.

"The devil played up," continued Raffles, with a laugh.  "Before I
tasted my soup I had decided what to do.  I had determined to rob that
bank instead of going to bed, and to be back in Melbourne for breakfast
if the doctor's mare could do it.  I would tell the old fellow that I
had missed my way and been bushed for hours, as I easily might have
been, and had never got to Yea at all. At Yea, on the other hand, the
personation and robbery would ever after be attributed to a member of
the gang that had waylaid and murdered the new manager with that very
object.  You are acquiring some experience in such matters, Bunny. I
ask you, was there ever a better get-out?  Last night's was something
like it, only never such a certainty.  And I saw it from the
beginning--saw to the end before I had finished my soup!

"To increase my chances, the cashier, who also lived in the bank, was
away over the holidays, had actually gone down to Melbourne to see us
play; and the man who had taken my horse also waited at table; for he
and his wife were the only servants, and they slept in a separate
building.  You may depend I ascertained this before we had finished
dinner.  Indeed I was by way of asking too many questions (the most
oblique and delicate was that which elicited my host's name, Ewbank),
nor was I careful enough to conceal their drift.

"'Do you know,' said this fellow Ewbank, who was one of the downright
sort, 'if it wasn't you, I should say you were in a funk of robbers?
Have you lost your nerve?'

"'I hope not,' said I, turning jolly hot, I can tell you; 'but--well,
it is not a pleasant thing to have to put a bullet through a fellow!'

"'No?' said he, coolly.  'I should enjoy nothing better, myself;
besides, yours didn't go through.'

"'I wish it had!' I was smart enough to cry.

"'Amen!' said he.

"And I emptied my glass; actually I did not know whether my wounded
bank-robber was in prison, dead, or at large!

"But, now that I had had more than enough of it, Ewbank would come back
to the subject.  He admitted that the staff was small; but as for
himself, he had a loaded revolver under his pillow all night, under the
counter all day, and he was only waiting for his chance.

"'Under the counter eh?' I was ass enough to say.

"'Yes; so had you!'

"He was looking at me in surprise, and something told me that to say
'of course--I had forgotten!' would have been quite fatal, considering
what I was supposed to have done.  So I looked down my nose and shook
my head.

"'But the papers said you had!' he cried.

"'Not under the counter," said I.

"'But it's the regulation!'

"For the moment, Bunny, I felt stumped, though I trust I only looked
more superior than before, and I think I justified my look.

"'The regulation!' I said at length, in the most offensive tone at my
command.  'Yes, the regulation would have us all dead men!  My dear
sir, do you expect your bank robber to let you reach for your gun in
the place where he knows it's kept?  I had mine in my pocket, and I got
my chance by retreating from the counter with all visible reluctance.'

"Ewbank stared at me with open eyes and a five-barred forehead, then
down came his fist on the table.

"'By God!  That was smart!  Still,' he added, like a man who would not
be in the wrong, 'the papers said the other thing, you know!'

"'Of course,' I rejoined, 'because they said what I told them.  You
wouldn't have had me advertise the fact that I improved upon the bank's
regulations, would you?'

"So that cloud rolled over, and by Jove it was a cloud with a golden
lining.  Not silver--real good Australian gold!  For old Ewbank hadn't
quite appreciated me till then; he was a hard nut, a much older man
than myself, and I felt pretty sure he thought me young for the place,
and my supposed feat a fluke.  But I never saw a man change his mind
more openly.  He got out his best brandy, he made me throw away the
cigar I was smoking, and opened a fresh box.  He was a
convivial-looking party, with a red moustache, and a very humorous face
(not unlike Tom Emmett's), and from that moment I laid myself out to
attack him on his convivial flank.  But he wasn't a Rosenthall, Bunny;
he had a treble-seamed, hand-sewn head, and could have drunk me under
the table ten times over.

"'All right,' I thought, 'you may go to bed sober, but you'll sleep
like a timber-yard!'  And I threw half he gave me through the open
window, when he wasn't looking.

"But he was a good chap, Ewbank, and don't you imagine he was at all
intemperate.  Convivial I called him, and I only wish he had been
something more.  He did, however, become more and more genial as the
evening advanced, and I had not much difficulty in getting him to show
me round the bank at what was really an unearthly hour for such a
proceeding.  It was when he went to fetch the revolver before turning
in.  I kept him out of his bed another twenty minutes, and I knew every
inch of the business premises before I shook hands with Ewbank in my
room.

"You won't guess what I did with myself for the next hour.  I undressed
and went to bed.  The incessant strain involved in even the most
deliberate impersonation is the most wearing thing I know; then how
much more so when the impersonation is impromptu!  There's no getting
your eye in; the next word may bowl you out; it's batting in a bad
light all through.  I haven't told you of half the tight places I was
in during a conversation that ran into hours and became dangerously
intimate towards the end.  You can imagine them for yourself, and then
picture me spread out on my bed, getting my second wind for the big
deed of the night.

"Once more I was in luck, for I had not been lying there long before I
heard my dear Ewbank snoring like a harmonium, and the music never
ceased for a moment; it was as loud as ever when I crept out and closed
my door behind me, as regular as ever when I stopped to listen at his.
And I have still to hear the concert that I shall enjoy much more.  The
good fellow snored me out of the bank, and was still snoring when I
again stood and listened under his open window.

"Why did I leave the bank first?  To catch and saddle the mare and
tether her in a clump of trees close by: to have the means of escape
nice and handy before I went to work.  I have often wondered at the
instinctive wisdom of the precaution; unconsciously I was acting on
what has been one of my guiding principles ever since.  Pains and
patience were required: I had to get my saddle without waking the man,
and I was not used to catching horses in a horse-paddock.  Then I
distrusted the poor mare, and I went back to the stables for a hatful
of oats, which I left with her in the clump, hat and all.  There was a
dog, too, to reckon with (our very worst enemy, Bunny); but I had been
'cute enough to make immense friends with him during the evening; and
he wagged his tail, not only when I came downstairs, but when I
reappeared at the back-door.

"As the soi-disant new manager, I had been able, in the most ordinary
course, to pump poor Ewbank about anything and everything connected
with the working of the bank, especially in those twenty last
invaluable minutes before turning in.  And I had made a very natural
point of asking him where he kept, and would recommend me to keep, the
keys at night.  Of course I thought he would take them with him to his
room; but no such thing; he had a dodge worth two of that.  What it was
doesn't much matter, but no outsider would have found those keys in a
month of Sundays.

"I, of course, had them in a few seconds, and in a few more I was in
the strong-room itself.  I forgot to say that the moon had risen and
was letting quite a lot of light into the bank.  I had, however,
brought a bit of candle with me from my room; and in the strong-room,
which was down some narrow stairs behind the counter in the
banking-chamber, I had no hesitation in lighting it.  There was no
window down there, and, though I could no longer hear old Ewbank
snoring, I had not the slightest reason to anticipate disturbance from
that quarter.  I did think of locking myself in while I was at work,
but, thank goodness, the iron door had no keyhole on the inside.

"Well, there were heaps of gold in the safe, but I only took what I
needed and could comfortably carry, not much more than a couple of
hundred altogether.  Not a note would I touch, and my native caution
came out also in the way I divided the sovereigns between all my
pockets, and packed them up so that I shouldn't be like the old woman
of Banbury Cross.  Well, you think me too cautious still, but I was
insanely cautious then.  And so it was that, just as I was ready to go,
whereas I might have been gone ten minutes, there came a violent
knocking at the outer door.

"Bunny, it was the outer door of the banking-chamber!  My candle must
have been seen!  And there I stood, with the grease running hot over my
fingers, in that brick grave of a strong-room!

"There was only one thing to be done.  I must trust to the sound
sleeping of Ewbank upstairs, open the door myself, knock the visitor
down, or shoot him with the revolver I had been new chum enough to buy
before leaving Melbourne, and make a dash for that clump of trees and
the doctor's mare.  My mind was made up in an instant, and I was at the
top of the strong-room stairs, the knocking still continuing, when a
second sound drove me back.  It was the sound of bare feet coming along
a corridor.

"My narrow stair was stone, I tumbled down it with little noise, and
had only to push open the iron door, for I had left the keys in the
safe.  As I did so I heard a handle turn overhead, and thanked my gods
that I had shut every single door behind me.  You see, old chap, one's
caution doesn't always let one in!

"'Who's that knocking?' said Ewbank up above.

"I could not make out the answer, but it sounded to me like the
irrelevant supplication of a spent man.  What I did hear, plainly, was
the cocking of the bank revolver before the bolts were shot back.
Then, a tottering step, a hard, short, shallow breathing, and Ewbank's
voice in horror--

"'My God!  Good Lord!  What's happened to you?  You're bleeding like a
pig!'

"'Not now,' came with a grateful sort of sigh.

"'But you have been!  What's done it?'

"'Bushrangers.'

"'Down the road?'

"'This and Whittlesea--tied to tree--cock shots--left me--bleed to
death ...'"

The weak voice failed, and the bare feet bolted.  Now was my time--if
the poor devil had fainted.  But I could not be sure, and there I
crouched down below in the dark, at the half-shut iron door, not less
spellbound than imprisoned.  It was just as well, for Ewbank wasn't
gone a minute.

"'Drink this,' I heard him say, and, when the other spoke again, his
voice was stronger.

"'Now I begin to feel alive ...'

"'Don't talk!'

"'It does me good.  You don't know what it was, all those miles alone,
one an hour at the outside!  I never thought I should come through. You
must let me tell you--in case I don't!'

"'Well, have another sip.'

"'Thank you ...  I said bushrangers; of course, there are no such
things nowadays.'

"'What were they, then?'

"'Bank-thieves; the one that had the pot shots was the very brute I
drove out of the bank at Coburg, with a bullet in him!"'

"I knew it!"

"Of course you did, Bunny; so did I, down in that strong-room; but old
Ewbank didn't, and I thought he was never going to speak again.

"'You're delirious,' he says at last.  'Who in blazes do you think you
are?'

"'The new manager.'

"'The new manager's in bed and asleep upstairs.'

"'When did he arrive?'

"'This evening.'

"'Call himself Raffles?'

"'Yes.'

"'Well, I'm damned!' whispered the real man. 'I thought it was just
revenge, but now I see what it was.  My dear sir, the man upstairs is
an imposter--if he's upstairs still!  He must be one of the gang.  He's
going to rob the bank--if he hasn't done so already!'

"'If he hasn't done so already,' muttered Ewbank after him; 'if he's
upstairs still!  By God, if he is, I'm sorry for him!'

"His tone was quiet enough, but about the nastiest I ever heard.  I
tell you, Bunny, I was glad I'd brought that revolver.  It looked as
though it must be mine against his, muzzle to muzzle.

"'Better have a look down here, first,' said the new manager.

"'While he gets through his window?  No, no, he's not down here.'

"'It's easy to have a look.'

"Bunny, if you ask me what was the most thrilling moment of my infamous
career, I say it was that moment.  There I stood at the bottom of those
narrow stone stairs, inside the strong-room, with the door a good foot
open, and I didn't know whether it would creak or not.  The light was
coming nearer--and I didn't know!  I had to chance it.  And it didn't
creak a bit; it was far too solid and well-hung; and I couldn't have
banged it if I tried, it was too heavy; and it fitted so close that I
felt and heard the air squeeze out in my face.  Every shred of light
went out, except the streak underneath, and it brightened.  How I
blessed that door!

"'No, he's not down THERE,' I heard, as though through cotton-wool;
then the streak went out too, and in a few seconds I ventured to open
once more, and was in time to hear them creeping to my room.

"Well, now there was not a fifth of a second to be lost; but I'm proud
to say I came up those stairs on my toes and fingers, and out of that
bank (they'd gone and left the door open) just as gingerly as though my
time had been my own.  I didn't even forget to put on the hat that the
doctor's mare was eating her oats out of, as well as she could with a
bit, or it alone would have landed me.  I didn't even gallop away, but
just jogged off quietly in the thick dust at the side of the road
(though I own my heart was galloping), and thanked my stars the bank
was at that end of the township, in which I really hadn't set foot.
The very last thing I heard was the two managers raising Cain and the
coachman.  And now, Bunny--"

He stood up and stretched himself, with a smile that ended in a yawn.
The black windows had faded through every shade of indigo; they now
framed their opposite neighbors, stark and livid in the dawn; and the
gas seemed turned to nothing in the globes.

"But that's not all?" I cried.

"I'm sorry to say it is," said Raffles apologetically.  "The thing
should have ended with an exciting chase, I know, but somehow it
didn't.  I suppose they thought I had got no end of a start; then they
had made up their minds that I belonged to the gang, which was not so
many miles away; and one of them had got as much as he could carry from
that gang as it was.  But I wasn't to know all that, and I'm bound to
say that there was plenty of excitement left for me.  Lord, how I made
that poor brute travel when I got among the trees! Though we must have
made it over fifty miles from Melbourne, we had done it at a snail's
pace; and those stolen oats had brisked the old girl up to such a pitch
that she fairly bolted when she felt her nose turned south.  By Jove,
it was no joke, in and out among those trees, and under branches with
your face in the mane!  I told you about the forest of dead gums?  It
looked perfectly ghostly in the moonlight.  And I found it as still as
I had left it--so still that I pulled up there, my first halt, and lay
with my ear to the ground for two or three minutes.  But I heard
nothing--not a thing but the mare's bellow and my own heart.  I'm
sorry, Bunny; but if ever you write my memoirs, you won't have any
difficulty in working up that chase. Play those dead gum-trees for all
they're worth, and let the bullets fly like hail.  I'll turn round in
my saddle to see Ewbank coming up hell-to-leather in his white suit,
and I'll duly paint it red.  Do it in the third person, and they won't
know how it's going to end."

"But I don't know myself," I complained. "Did the mare carry you all
the way back to Melbourne?"

"Every rod, pole or perch!  I had her well seen to at our hotel, and
returned her to the doctor in the evening.  He was tremendously tickled
to hear that I had been bushed; next morning he brought me the paper to
show me what I had escaped at Yea!"

"Without suspecting anything?"

"Ah!" said Raffles, as he put out the gas; "that's a point on which
I've never made up my mind. The mare and her color was a
coincidence--luckily she was only a bay--and I fancied the condition of
the beast must have told a tale.  The doctor's manner was certainly
different.  I'm inclined to think he suspected something, though not
the right thing.  I wasn't expecting him, and I fear my appearance may
have increased his suspicions."

I asked him why.

"I used to have rather a heavy moustache," said Raffles, "but I lost it
the day after I lost my innocence."



WILFUL MURDER

Of the various robberies in which we were both concerned, it is but the
few, I find, that will bear telling at any length.  Not that the others
contained details which even I would hesitate to recount; it is,
rather, the very absence of untoward incident which renders them
useless for my present purpose.  In point of fact our plans were so
craftily laid (by Raffles) that the chances of a hitch were invariably
reduced to a minimum before we went to work.  We might be disappointed
in the market value of our haul; but it was quite the exception for us
to find ourselves confronted by unforeseen impediments, or involved in
a really dramatic dilemma.  There was a sameness even in our spoil;
for, of course, only the most precious stones are worth the trouble we
took and the risks we ran.  In short, our most successful escapades
would prove the greatest weariness of all in narrative form; and none
more so than the dull affair of the Ardagh emeralds, some eight or nine
weeks after the Milchester cricket week.  The former, however, had a
sequel that I would rather forget than all our burglaries put together.

It was the evening after our return from Ireland, and I was waiting at
my rooms for Raffles, who had gone off as usual to dispose of the
plunder.  Raffles had his own method of conducting this very vital
branch of our business, which I was well content to leave entirely in
his hands.  He drove the bargains, I believe, in a thin but subtle
disguise of the flashy-seedy order, and always in the Cockney dialect,
of which he had made himself a master.  Moreover, he invariably
employed the same "fence," who was ostensibly a money-lender in a small
(but yet notorious) way, and in reality a rascal as remarkable as
Raffles himself. Only lately I also had been to the man, but in my
proper person.  We had needed capital for the getting of these very
emeralds, and I had raised a hundred pounds, on the terms you would
expect, from a soft-spoken graybeard with an ingratiating smile, an
incessant bow, and the shiftiest old eyes that ever flew from rim to
rim of a pair of spectacles.  So the original sinews and the final
spoils of war came in this case from the self-same source--a
circumstance which appealed to us both.

But these same final spoils I was still to see, and I waited and waited
with an impatience that grew upon me with the growing dusk.  At my open
window I had played Sister Ann until the faces in the street below were
no longer distinguishable. And now I was tearing to and fro in the grip
of horrible hypotheses--a grip that tightened when at last the
lift-gates opened with a clatter outside--that held me breathless until
a well-known tattoo followed on my door.

"In the dark!" said Raffles, as I dragged him in.  "Why, Bunny, what's
wrong?"

"Nothing--now you've come," said I, shutting the door behind him in a
fever of relief and anxiety.  "Well?  Well?  What did they fetch?"

"Five hundred."

"Down?"

"Got it in my pocket."

"Good man!" I cried.  "You don't know what a stew I've been in.  I'll
switch on the light.  I've been thinking of you and nothing else for
the last hour.  I--I was ass enough to think something had gone wrong!"

Raffles was smiling when the white light filled the room, but for the
moment I did not perceive the peculiarity of his smile.  I was
fatuously full of my own late tremors and present relief; and my first
idiotic act was to spill some whiskey and squirt the soda-water all
over in my anxiety to do instant justice to the occasion.

"So you thought something had happened?" said Raffles, leaning back in
my chair as he lit a cigarette, and looking much amused.  "What would
you say if something had?  Sit tight, my dear chap!  It was nothing of
the slightest consequence, and it's all over now.  A stern chase and a
long one, Bunny, but I think I'm well to windward this time."

And suddenly I saw that his collar was limp, his hair matted, his boots
thick with dust.

"The police?" I whispered aghast.

"Oh, dear, no; only old Baird."

"Baird!  But wasn't it Baird who took the emeralds?"

"It was."

"Then how came he to chase you?"

"My dear fellow, I'll tell you if you give me a chance; it's really
nothing to get in the least excited about.  Old Baird has at last
spotted that I'm not quite the common cracksman I would have him think
me.  So he's been doing his best to run me to my burrow."

"And you call that nothing!"

"It would be something if he had succeeded; but he has still to do
that.  I admit, however, that he made me sit up for the time being.  It
all comes of going on the job so far from home.  There was the old
brute with the whole thing in his morning paper.  He KNEW it must have
been done by some fellow who could pass himself off for a gentleman,
and I saw his eyebrows go up the moment I told him I was the man, with
the same old twang that you could cut with a paper-knife.  I did my
best to get out of it--swore I had a pal who was a real swell--but I
saw very plainly that I had given myself away.  He gave up haggling.
He paid my price as though he enjoyed doing it.  But I FELT him
following me when I made tracks; though, of course, I didn't turn round
to see."

"Why not?"

"My dear Bunny, it's the very worst thing you can do.  As long as you
look unsuspecting they'll keep their distance, and so long as they keep
their distance you stand a chance.  Once show that you know you're
being followed, and it's flight or fight for all you're worth.  I never
even looked round; and mind you never do in the same hole.  I just
hurried up to Blackfriars and booked for High Street, Kensington, at
the top of my voice; and as the train was leaving Sloane Square out I
hopped, and up all those stairs like a lamplighter, and round to the
studio by the back streets.  Well, to be on the safe side, I lay low
there all the afternoon, hearing nothing in the least suspicious, and
only wishing I had a window to look through instead of that beastly
skylight.  However, the coast seemed clear enough, and thus far it was
my mere idea that he would follow me; there was nothing to show he had.
So at last I marched out in my proper rig--almost straight into old
Baird's arms!"

"What on earth did you do?"

"Walked past him as though I had never set eyes on him in my life, and
didn't then; took a hansom in the King's Road, and drove like the deuce
to Clapham Junction; rushed on to the nearest platform, without a
ticket, jumped into the first train I saw, got out at Twickenham,
walked full tilt back to Richmond, took the District to Charing Cross,
and here I am!  Ready for a tub and a change, and the best dinner the
club can give us. I came to you first, because I thought you might be
getting anxious.  Come round with me, and I won't keep you long."

"You're certain you've given him the slip?" I said, as we put on our
hats.

"Certain enough; but we can make assurance doubly sure," said Raffles,
and went to my window, where he stood for a moment or two looking down
into the street.

"All right?" I asked him.

"All right," said he; and we went downstairs forthwith, and so to the
Albany arm-in-arm.

But we were both rather silent on our way.  I, for my part, was
wondering what Raffles would do about the studio in Chelsea, whither,
at all events, he had been successfully dogged.  To me the point seemed
one of immediate importance, but when I mentioned it he said there was
time enough to think about that.  His one other remark was made after
we had nodded (in Bond Street) to a young blood of our acquaintance who
happened to be getting himself a bad name.

"Poor Jack Rutter!" said Raffles, with a sigh. "Nothing's sadder than
to see a fellow going to the bad like that.  He's about mad with drink
and debt, poor devil!  Did you see his eye?  Odd that we should have
met him to-night, by the way; it's old Baird who's said to have skinned
him.  By God, but I'd like to skin old Baird!"

And his tone took a sudden low fury, made the more noticeable by
another long silence, which lasted, indeed, throughout an admirable
dinner at the club, and for some time after we had settled down in a
quiet corner of the smoking-room with our coffee and cigars.  Then at
last I saw Raffles looking at me with his lazy smile, and I knew that
the morose fit was at an end.

"I daresay you wonder what I've been thinking about all this time?"
said he.  "I've been thinking what rot it is to go doing things by
halves!"

"Well," said I, returning his smile, "that's not a charge that you can
bring against yourself, is it?"

"I'm not so sure," said Raffles, blowing a meditative puff; "as a
matter of fact, I was thinking less of myself than of that poor devil
of a Jack Rutter.  There's a fellow who does things by halves; he's
only half gone to the bad; and look at the difference between him and
us!  He's under the thumb of a villainous money-lender; we are solvent
citizens.  He's taken to drink; we're as sober as we are solvent.  His
pals are beginning to cut him; our difficulty is to keep the pal from
the door.  Enfin, he begs or borrows, which is stealing by halves; and
we steal outright and are done with it.  Obviously ours is the more
honest course.  Yet I'm not sure, Bunny, but we're doing the thing by
halves ourselves!"

"Why?  What more could we do?" I exclaimed in soft derision, looking
round, however, to make sure that we were not overheard.

"What more," said Raffles.  "Well, murder--for one thing."

"Rot!"

"A matter of opinion, my dear Bunny; I don't mean it for rot.  I've
told you before that the biggest man alive is the man who's committed a
murder, and not yet been found out; at least he ought to be, but he so
very seldom has the soul to appreciate himself.  Just think of it!
Think of coming in here and talking to the men, very likely about the
murder itself; and knowing you've done it; and wondering how they'd
look if THEY knew! Oh, it would be great, simply great!  But, besides
all that, when you were caught there'd be a merciful and dramatic end
of you.  You'd fill the bill for a few weeks, and then snuff out with a
flourish of extra-specials; you wouldn't rust with a vile repose for
seven or fourteen years."

"Good old Raffles!" I chuckled.  "I begin to forgive you for being in
bad form at dinner."

"But I was never more earnest in my life."

"Go on!"

"I mean it."

"You know very well that you wouldn't commit a murder, whatever else
you might do."

"I know very well I'm going to commit one to-night!"

He had been leaning back in the saddle-bag chair, watching me with keen
eyes sheathed by languid lids; now he started forward, and his eyes
leapt to mine like cold steel from the scabbard.  They struck home to
my slow wits; their meaning was no longer in doubt.  I, who knew the
man, read murder in his clenched hands, and murder in his locked lips,
but a hundred murders in those hard blue eyes.

"Baird?" I faltered, moistening my lips with my tongue.

"Of course."

"But you said it didn't matter about the room in Chelsea?"

"I told a lie."

"Anyway you gave him the slip afterwards!"

"That was another.  I didn't.  I thought I had when I came up to you
this evening; but when I looked out of your window--you remember?  to
make assurance doubly sure--there he was on the opposite pavement down
below."

"And you never said a word about it!"

"I wasn't going to spoil your dinner, Bunny, and I wasn't going to let
you spoil mine.  But there he was as large as life, and, of course, he
followed us to the Albany.  A fine game for him to play, a game after
his mean old heart: blackmail from me, bribes from the police, the one
bidding against the other; but he sha'n't play it with me, he sha'n't
live to, and the world will have an extortioner the less.  Waiter!  Two
Scotch whiskeys and sodas.  I'm off at eleven, Bunny; it's the only
thing to be done."

"You know where he lives, then?"

"Yes, out Willesden way, and alone; the fellow's a miser among other
things.  I long ago found out all about him."

Again I looked round the room; it was a young man's club, and young men
were laughing, chatting, smoking, drinking, on every hand.  One nodded
to me through the smoke.  Like a machine I nodded to him, and turned
back to Raffles with a groan.

"Surely you will give him a chance!" I urged. "The very sight of your
pistol should bring him to terms."

"It wouldn't make him keep them."

"But you might try the effect?"

"I probably shall.  Here's a drink for you, Bunny.  Wish me luck."

"I'm coming too."

"I don't want you."

"But I must come!"

An ugly gleam shot from the steel blue eyes.

"To interfere?" said Raffles.

"Not I."

"You give me your word?"

"I do."

"Bunny, if you break it--"

"You may shoot me, too!"

"I most certainly should," said Raffles, solemnly. "So you come at your
own peril, my dear man; but, if you are coming--well, the sooner the
better, for I must stop at my rooms on the way."

Five minutes later I was waiting for him at the Piccadilly entrance to
the Albany.  I had a reason for remaining outside.  It was the
feeling--half hope, half fear--that Angus Baird might still be on our
trail--that some more immediate and less cold-blooded way of dealing
with him might result from a sudden encounter between the money-lender
and myself.  I would not warn him of his danger; but I would avert
tragedy at all costs.  And when no such encounter had taken place, and
Raffles and I were fairly on our way to Willesden, that, I think, was
still my honest resolve.  I would not break my word if I could help it,
but it was a comfort to feel that I could break it if I liked, on an
understood penalty.  Alas!  I fear my good intentions were tainted with
a devouring curiosity, and overlaid by the fascination which goes hand
in hand with horror.

I have a poignant recollection of the hour it took us to reach the
house.  We walked across St. James's Park (I can see the lights now,
bright on the bridge and blurred in the water), and we had some minutes
to wait for the last train to Willesden.  It left at 11.21, I remember,
and Raffles was put out to find it did not go on to Kensal Rise. We had
to get out at Willesden Junction and walk on through the streets into
fairly open country that happened to be quite new to me.  I could never
find the house again.  I remember, however, that we were on a dark
footpath between woods and fields when the clocks began striking twelve.

"Surely," said I, "we shall find him in bed and asleep?"

"I hope we do," said Raffles grimly.

"Then you mean to break in?"

"What else did you think?"

I had not thought about it at all; the ultimate crime had monopolized
my mind.  Beside it burglary was a bagatelle, but one to deprecate none
the less.  I saw obvious objections: the man was au fait with cracksmen
and their ways: he would certainly have firearms, and might be the
first to use them.

"I could wish nothing better," said Raffles. "Then it will be man to
man, and devil take the worst shot.  You don't suppose I prefer foul
play to fair, do you?  But die he must, by one or the other, or it's a
long stretch for you and me."

"Better that than this!"

"Then stay where you are, my good fellow.  I told you I didn't want
you; and this is the house. So good-night."

I could see no house at all, only the angle of a high wall rising
solitary in the night, with the starlight glittering on battlements of
broken glass; and in the wall a tall green gate, bristling with spikes,
and showing a front for battering-rams in the feeble rays an outlying
lamp-post cast across the new-made road.  It seemed to me a road of
building-sites, with but this one house built, all by itself, at one
end; but the night was too dark for more than a mere impression.

Raffles, however, had seen the place by daylight, and had come prepared
for the special obstacles; already he was reaching up and putting
champagne corks on the spikes, and in another moment he had his folded
covert-coat across the corks.  I stepped back as he raised himself, and
saw a little pyramid of slates snip the sky above the gate; as he
squirmed over I ran forward, and had my own weight on the spikes and
corks and covert-coat when he gave the latter a tug.

"Coming after all?"

"Rather!"

"Take care, then; the place is all bell-wires and springs.  It's no
soft thing, this!  There--stand still while I take off the corks."

The garden was very small and new, with a grass-plot still in separate
sods, but a quantity of full-grown laurels stuck into the raw clay
beds. "Bells in themselves," as Raffles whispered; "there's nothing
else rustles so--cunning old beast!"  And we gave them a wide berth as
we crept across the grass.

"He's gone to bed!"

"I don't think so, Bunny.  I believe he's seen us."

"Why?"

"I saw a light."

"Where?"

"Downstairs, for an instant, when I--"

His whisper died away; he had seen the light again; and so had I.

It lay like a golden rod under the front-door--and vanished.  It
reappeared like a gold thread under the lintel--and vanished for good.
We heard the stairs creak, creak, and cease, also for good.  We neither
saw nor heard any more, though we stood waiting on the grass till our
feet were soaked with the dew.

"I'm going in," said Raffles at last.  "I don't believe he saw us at
all.  I wish he had.  This way."

We trod gingerly on the path, but the gravel stuck to our wet soles,
and grated horribly in a little tiled veranda with a glass door leading
within. It was through this glass that Raffles had first seen the
light; and he now proceeded to take out a pane, with the diamond, the
pot of treacle, and the sheet of brown paper which were seldom omitted
from his impedimenta.  Nor did he dispense with my own assistance,
though he may have accepted it as instinctively as it was proffered.
In any case it was these fingers that helped to spread the treacle on
the brown paper, and pressed the latter to the glass until the diamond
had completed its circuit and the pane fell gently back into our hands.

Raffles now inserted his hand, turned the key in the lock, and, by
making a long arm, succeeded in drawing the bolt at the bottom of the
door; it proved to be the only one, and the door opened, though not
very wide.

"What's that?" said Raffles, as something crunched beneath his feet on
the very threshold.

"A pair of spectacles," I whispered, picking them up.  I was still
fingering the broken lenses and the bent rims when Raffles tripped and
almost fell, with a gasping cry that he made no effort to restrain.

"Hush, man, hush!" I entreated under my breath.  "He'll hear you!"

For answer his teeth chattered--even his--and I heard him fumbling with
his matches.  "No, Bunny; he won't hear us," whispered Raffles,
presently; and he rose from his knees and lit a gas as the match burnt
down.

Angus Baird was lying on his own floor, dead, with his gray hairs glued
together by his blood; near him a poker with the black end glistening;
in a corner his desk, ransacked, littered. A clock ticked noisily on
the chimney-piece; for perhaps a hundred seconds there was no other
sound.

Raffles stood very still, staring down at the dead, as a man might
stare into an abyss after striding blindly to its brink.  His breath
came audibly through wide nostrils; he made no other sign, and his lips
seemed sealed.

"That light!" said I, hoarsely; "the light we saw under the door!"

With a start he turned to me.

"It's true!  I had forgotten it.  It was in here I saw it first!"

"He must be upstairs still!"

"If he is we'll soon rout him out.  Come on!"

Instead I laid a hand upon his arm, imploring him to reflect--that his
enemy was dead now--that we should certainly be involved--that now or
never was our own time to escape.  He shook me off in a sudden fury of
impatience, a reckless contempt in his eyes, and, bidding me save my
own skin if I liked, he once more turned his back upon me, and this
time left me half resolved to take him at his word.  Had he forgotten
on what errand he himself was here?  Was he determined that this night
should end in black disaster?  As I asked myself these questions his
match flared in the hall; in another moment the stairs were creaking
under his feet, even as they had creaked under those of the murderer;
and the humane instinct that inspired him in defiance of his risk was
borne in also upon my slower sensibilities.  Could we let the murderer
go?  My answer was to bound up the creaking stairs and to overhaul
Raffles on the landing.

But three doors presented themselves; the first opened into a bedroom
with the bed turned down but undisturbed; the second room was empty in
every sense; the third door was locked.

Raffles lit the landing gas.

"He's in there," said he, cocking his revolver. "Do you remember how we
used to break into the studies at school?  Here goes!"

His flat foot crashed over the keyhole, the lock gave, the door flew
open, and in the sudden draught the landing gas heeled over like a
cobble in a squall; as the flame righted itself I saw a fixed bath, two
bath-towels knotted together--an open window--a cowering figure--and
Raffles struck aghast on the threshold.

"JACK--RUTTER?"

The words came thick and slow with horror, and in horror I heard myself
repeating them, while the cowering figure by the bathroom window rose
gradually erect.

"It's you!" he whispered, in amazement no less than our own; "it's you
two!  What's it mean, Raffles?  I saw you get over the gate; a bell
rang, the place is full of them.  Then you broke in.  What's it all
mean?"

"We may tell you that, when you tell us what in God's name you've done,
Rutter!"

"Done?  What have I done?"  The unhappy wretch came out into the light
with bloodshot, blinking eyes, and a bloody shirt-front.  "You
know--you've seen--but I'll tell you if you like.  I've killed a
robber; that's all.  I've killed a robber, a usurer, a jackal, a
blackmailer, the cleverest and the cruellest villain unhung.  I'm ready
to hang for him.  I'd kill him again!"

And he looked us fiercely in the face, a fine defiance in his
dissipated eyes; his breast heaving, his jaw like a rock.

"Shall I tell you how it happened?" he went passionately on.  "He's
made my life a hell these weeks and months past.  You may know that.  A
perfect hell!  Well, to-night I met him in Bond Street.  Do you
remember when I met you fellows?  He wasn't twenty yards behind you; he
was on your tracks, Raffles; he saw me nod to you, and stopped me and
asked me who you were.  He seemed as keen as knives to know, I couldn't
think why, and didn't care either, for I saw my chance.  I said I'd
tell him all about you if he'd give me a private interview.  He said he
wouldn't.  I said he should, and held him by the coat; by the time I
let him go you were out of sight, and I waited where I was till he came
back in despair.  I had the whip-hand of him then.  I could dictate
where the interview should be, and I made him take me home with him,
still swearing to tell him all about you when we'd had our talk.  Well,
when we got here I made him give me something to eat, putting him off
and off; and about ten o'clock I heard the gate shut.  I waited a bit,
and then asked him if he lived alone.

"'Not at all,' says he; 'did you not see the servant?'

"I said I'd seen her, but I thought I'd heard her go; if I was mistaken
no doubt she would come when she was called; and I yelled three times
at the top of my voice.  Of course there was no servant to come.  I
knew that, because I came to see him one night last week, and he
interviewed me himself through the gate, but wouldn't open it. Well,
when I had done yelling, and not a soul had come near us, he was as
white as that ceiling. Then I told him we could have our chat at last;
and I picked the poker out of the fender, and told him how he'd robbed
me, but, by God, he shouldn't rob me any more.  I gave him three
minutes to write and sign a settlement of all his iniquitous claims
against me, or have his brains beaten out over his own carpet.  He
thought a minute, and then went to his desk for pen and paper.  In two
seconds he was round like lightning with a revolver, and I went for him
bald-headed.  He fired two or three times and missed; you can find the
holes if you like; but I hit him every time--my God!  I was like a
savage till the thing was done. And then I didn't care.  I went through
his desk looking for my own bills, and was coming away when you turned
up.  I said I didn't care, nor do I; but I was going to give myself up
to-night, and shall still; so you see I sha'n't give you fellows much
trouble!"

He was done; and there we stood on the landing of the lonely house, the
low, thick, eager voice still racing and ringing through our ears; the
dead man below, and in front of us his impenitent slayer.  I knew to
whom the impenitence would appeal when he had heard the story, and I
was not mistaken.

"That's all rot," said Raffles, speaking after a pause; "we sha'n't let
you give yourself up."

"You sha'n't stop me!  What would be the good?  The woman saw me; it
would only be a question of time; and I can't face waiting to be taken.
Think of it: waiting for them to touch you on the shoulder!  No, no,
no; I'll give myself up and get it over."

His speech was changed; he faltered, floundered. It was as though a
clearer perception of his position had come with the bare idea of
escape from it.

"But listen to me," urged Raffles; "We're here at our peril ourselves.
We broke in like thieves to enforce redress for a grievance very like
your own.  But don't you see?  We took out a pane--did the thing like
regular burglars.  Regular burglars will get the credit of all the
rest!"

"You mean that I sha'n't be suspected?"

"I do."

"But I don't want to get off scotfree," cried Rutter hysterically.
"I've killed him.  I know that.  But it was in self-defence; it wasn't
murder.  I must own up and take the consequences. I shall go mad if I
don't!"

His hands twitched; his lips quivered; the tears were in his eyes.
Raffles took him roughly by the shoulder.

"Look here, you fool!  If the three of us were caught here now, do you
know what those consequences would be?  We should swing in a row at
Newgate in six weeks' time!  You talk as though we were sitting in a
club; don't you know it's one o'clock in the morning, and the lights
on, and a dead man down below?  For God's sake pull yourself together,
and do what I tell you, or you're a dead man yourself."

"I wish I was one!" Rutter sobbed.  "I wish I had his revolver to blow
my own brains out. It's lying under him.  O my God, my God!"

His knees knocked together: the frenzy of reaction was at its height.
We had to take him downstairs between us, and so through the front door
out into the open air.

All was still outside--all but the smothered weeping of the unstrung
wretch upon our hands.  Raffles returned for a moment to the house;
then all was dark as well.  The gate opened from within; we closed it
carefully behind us; and so left the starlight shining on broken glass
and polished spikes, one and all as we had found them.

We escaped; no need to dwell on our escape.  Our murderer seemed set
upon the scaffold--drunk with his deed, he was more trouble than six
men drunk with wine.  Again and again we threatened to leave him to his
fate, to wash our hands of him.  But incredible and unmerited luck was
with the three of us.  Not a soul did we meet between that and
Willesden; and of those who saw us later, did one think of the two
young men with crooked white ties, supporting a third in a seemingly
unmistakable condition, when the evening papers apprised the town of a
terrible tragedy at Kensal Rise?

We walked to Maida Vale, and thence drove openly to my rooms.  But I
alone went upstairs; the other two proceeded to the Albany, and I saw
no more of Raffles for forty-eight hours.  He was not at his rooms when
I called in the morning; he had left no word.  When he reappeared the
papers were full of the murder; and the man who had committed it was on
the wide Atlantic, a steerage passenger from Liverpool to New York.

"There was no arguing with him," so Raffles told me; "either he must
make a clean breast of it or flee the country.  So I rigged him up at
the studio, and we took the first train to Liverpool.  Nothing would
induce him to sit tight and enjoy the situation as I should have
endeavored to do in his place; and it's just as well!  I went to his
diggings to destroy some papers, and what do you think I found.  The
police in possession; there's a warrant out against him already!  The
idiots think that window wasn't genuine, and the warrant's out.  It
won't be my fault if it's ever served!"

Nor, after all these years, can I think it will be mine.



NINE POINTS OF THE LAW

"Well," said Raffles, "what do you make of it?"

I read the advertisement once more before replying.  It was in the last
column of the Daily Telegraph, and it ran:

TWO THOUSAND POUNDS REWARD--The above sum may be earned by any one
qualified to undertake delicate mission and prepared to run certain
risk.--Apply by telegram, Security, London.


"I think," said I, "it's the most extraordinary advertisement that ever
got into print!"

Raffles smiled.

"Not quite all that, Bunny; still, extraordinary enough, I grant you."

"Look at the figure!"

"It is certainly large."

"And the mission--and the risk!"

"Yes; the combination is frank, to say the least of it.  But the really
original point is requiring applications by telegram to a telegraphic
address!  There's something in the fellow who thought of that, and
something in his game; with one word he chokes off the million who
answer an advertisement every day--when they can raise the stamp. My
answer cost me five bob; but then I prepaid another."

"You don't mean to say that you've applied?"

"Rather," said Raffles.  "I want two thousand pounds as much as any
man."

"Put your own name?"

"Well--no, Bunny, I didn't.  In point of fact I smell something
interesting and illegal, and you know what a cautious chap I am.  I
signed myself Glasspool, care of Hickey, 38, Conduit Street; that's my
tailor, and after sending the wire I went round and told him what to
expect.  He promised to send the reply along the moment it came.  I
shouldn't be surprised if that's it!"

And he was gone before a double-knock on the outer door had done
ringing through the rooms, to return next minute with an open telegram
and a face full of news.

"What do you think?" said he.  "Security's that fellow Addenbrooke, the
police-court lawyer, and he wants to see me INSTANTER!"

"Do you know him, then?"

"Merely by repute.  I only hope he doesn't know me.  He's the chap who
got six weeks for sailing too close to the wind in the Sutton-Wilmer
case; everybody wondered why he wasn't struck off the rolls.  Instead
of that he's got a first-rate practice on the seamy side, and every
blackguard with half a case takes it straight to Bennett Addenbrooke.
He's probably the one man who would have the cheek to put in an
advertisement like that, and the one man who could do it without
exciting suspicion.  It's simply in his line; but you may be sure
there's something shady at the bottom of it.  The odd thing is that I
have long made up my mind to go to Addenbrooke myself if accidents
should happen."

"And you're going to him now?"

"This minute," said Raffles, brushing his hat; "and so are you."

"But I came in to drag you out to lunch."

"You shall lunch with me when we've seen this fellow.  Come on, Bunny,
and we'll choose your name on the way.  Mine's Glasspool, and don't you
forget it."

Mr. Bennett Addenbrooke occupied substantial offices in Wellington
Street, Strand, and was out when we arrived; but he had only just gone
"over the way to the court"; and five minutes sufficed to produce a
brisk, fresh-colored, resolute-looking man, with a very confident,
rather festive air, and black eyes that opened wide at the sight of
Raffles.

"Mr.--Glasspool?" exclaimed the lawyer.

"My name," said Raffles, with dry effrontery.

"Not up at Lord's, however!" said the other, slyly.  "My dear sir, I
have seen you take far too many wickets to make any mistake!"

For a single moment Raffles looked venomous; then he shrugged and
smiled, and the smile grew into a little cynical chuckle.

"So you have bowled me out in my turn?" said he.  "Well, I don't think
there's anything to explain.  I am harder up than I wished to admit
under my own name, that's all, and I want that thousand pounds reward."

"Two thousand," said the solicitor.  "And the man who is not above an
alias happens to be just the sort of man I want; so don't let that
worry you, my dear sir.  The matter, however, is of a strictly private
and confidential character."  And he looked very hard at me.

"Quite so," said Raffles.  "But there was something about a risk?"

"A certain risk is involved."

"Then surely three heads will be better than two.  I said I wanted that
thousand pounds; my friend here wants the other.  We are both cursedly
hard up, and we go into this thing together or not at all.  Must you
have his name too?  I should give him my real one, Bunny."

Mr. Addenbrooke raised his eyebrows over the card I found for him; then
he drummed upon it with his finger-nail, and his embarrassment
expressed itself in a puzzled smile.

"The fact is, I find myself in a difficulty," he confessed at last.
"Yours is the first reply I have received; people who can afford to
send long telegrams don't rush to the advertisements in the Daily
Telegraph; but, on the other hand, I was not quite prepared to hear
from men like yourselves.  Candidly, and on consideration, I am not
sure that you ARE the stamp of men for me--men who belong to good
clubs!  I rather intended to appeal to the--er--adventurous classes."

"We are adventurers," said Raffles gravely.

"But you respect the law?"

The black eyes gleamed shrewdly.

"We are not professional rogues, if that's what you mean," said
Raffles, smiling.  "But on our beam-ends we are; we would do a good
deal for a thousand pounds apiece, eh, Bunny?"

"Anything," I murmured.

The solicitor rapped his desk.

"I'll tell you what I want you to do.  You can but refuse.  It's
illegal, but it's illegality in a good cause; that's the risk, and my
client is prepared to pay for it.  He will pay for the attempt, in case
of failure; the money is as good as yours once you consent to run the
risk.  My client is Sir Bernard Debenham, of Broom Hall, Esher."

"I know his son," I remarked.

Raffles knew him too, but said nothing, and his eye drooped disapproval
in my direction.  Bennett Addenbrooke turned to me.

"Then," said he, "you have the privilege of knowing one of the most
complete young black-guards about town, and the fons et origo of the
whole trouble.  As you know the son, you may know the father too, at
all events by reputation; and in that case I needn't tell you that he
is a very peculiar man.  He lives alone in a storehouse of treasures
which no eyes but his ever behold.  He is said to have the finest
collection of pictures in the south of England, though nobody ever sees
them to judge; pictures, fiddles and furniture are his hobby, and he is
undoubtedly very eccentric. Nor can one deny that there has been
considerable eccentricity in his treatment of his son.  For years Sir
Bernard paid his debts, and the other day, without the slightest
warning, not only refused to do so any more, but absolutely stopped the
lad's allowance.  Well, I'll tell you what has happened; but first of
all you must know, or you may remember, that I appeared for young
Debenham in a little scrape he got into a year or two ago.  I got him
off all right, and Sir Bernard paid me handsomely on the nail.  And no
more did I hear or see of either of them until one day last week."

The lawyer drew his chair nearer ours, and leant forward with a hand on
either knee.

"On Tuesday of last week I had a telegram from Sir Bernard; I was to go
to him at once.  I found him waiting for me in the drive; without a
word he led me to the picture-gallery, which was locked and darkened,
drew up a blind, and stood simply pointing to an empty picture-frame.
It was a long time before I could get a word out of him.  Then at last
he told me that that frame had contained one of the rarest and most
valuable pictures in England--in the world--an original Velasquez.  I
have checked this," said the lawyer, "and it seems literally true; the
picture was a portrait of the Infanta Maria Teresa, said to be one of
the artist's greatest works, second only to another portrait of one of
the Popes in Rome--so they told me at the National Gallery, where they
had its history by heart.  They say there that the picture is
practically priceless.  And young Debenham has sold it for five
thousand pounds!"

"The deuce he has," said Raffles.

I inquired who had bought it.

"A Queensland legislator of the name of Craggs--the Hon. John Montagu
Craggs, M.L.C., to give him his full title.  Not that we knew anything
about him on Tuesday last; we didn't even know for certain that young
Debenham had stolen the picture.  But he had gone down for money on the
Monday evening, had been refused, and it was plain enough that he had
helped himself in this way; he had threatened revenge, and this was it.
Indeed, when I hunted him up in town on the Tuesday night, he confessed
as much in the most brazen manner imaginable.  But he wouldn't tell me
who was the purchaser, and finding out took the rest of the week; but I
did find out, and a nice time I've had of it ever since!  Backwards and
forwards between Esher and the Metropole, where the Queenslander is
staying, sometimes twice a day; threats, offers, prayers, entreaties,
not one of them a bit of good!"

"But," said Raffles, "surely it's a clear case?  The sale was illegal;
you can pay him back his money and force him to give the picture up."

"Exactly; but not without an action and a public scandal, and that my
client declines to face.  He would rather lose even his picture than
have the whole thing get into the papers; he has disowned his son, but
he will not disgrace him; yet his picture he must have by hook or
crook, and there's the rub!  I am to get it back by fair means or foul.
He gives me carte blanche in the matter, and, I verily believe, would
throw in a blank check if asked.  He offered one to the Queenslander,
but Craggs simply tore it in two; the one old boy is as much a
character as the other, and between the two of them I'm at my wits'
end."

"So you put that advertisement in the paper?" said Raffles, in the dry
tones he had adopted throughout the interview.

"As a last resort.  I did."

"And you wish us to STEAL this picture?"

It was magnificently said; the lawyer flushed from his hair to his
collar.

"I knew you were not the men!" he groaned. "I never thought of men of
your stamp!  But it's not stealing," he exclaimed heatedly; "it's
recovering stolen property.  Besides, Sir Bernard will pay him his five
thousand as soon as he has the picture; and, you'll see, old Craggs
will be just as loath to let it come out as Sir Bernard himself.  No,
no--it's an enterprise, an adventure, if you like--but not stealing."

"You yourself mentioned the law," murmured Raffles.

"And the risk," I added.

"We pay for that," he said once more.

"But not enough," said Raffles, shaking his head.  "My good sir,
consider what it means to us.  You spoke of those clubs; we should not
only get kicked out of them, but put in prison like common burglars!
It's true we're hard up, but it simply isn't worth it at the price.
Double your stakes, and I for one am your man."

Addenbrooke wavered.

"Do you think you could bring it off?"

"We could try."

"But you have no--"

"Experience?  Well, hardly!"

"And you would really run the risk for four thousand pounds?"

Raffles looked at me.  I nodded.

"We would," said he, "and blow the odds!"

"It's more than I can ask my client to pay," said Addenbrooke, growing
firm.

"Then it's more than you can expect us to risk."

"You are in earnest?"

"God wot!"

"Say three thousand if you succeed!"

"Four is our figure, Mr. Addenbrooke."

"Then I think it should be nothing if you fail."

"Doubles or quits?" cried Raffles.  "Well, that's sporting.  Done!"

Addenbrooke opened his lips, half rose, then sat back in his chair, and
looked long and shrewdly at Raffles--never once at me.

"I know your bowling," said he reflectively.  "I go up to Lord's
whenever I want an hour's real rest, and I've seen you bowl again and
again--yes, and take the best wickets in England on a plumb pitch.  I
don't forget the last Gentleman and Players; I was there.  You're up to
every trick--every one ...  I'm inclined to think that if anybody could
bowl out this old Australian ...  Damme, I believe you're my very man!"

The bargain was clinched at the Cafe Royal, where Bennett Addenbrooke
insisted on playing host at an extravagant luncheon.  I remember that
he took his whack of champagne with the nervous freedom of a man at
high pressure, and have no doubt I kept him in countenance by an equal
indulgence; but Raffles, ever an exemplar in such matters, was more
abstemious even than his wont, and very poor company to boot.  I can
see him now, his eyes in his plate--thinking--thinking.  I can see the
solicitor glancing from him to me in an apprehension of which I did my
best to disabuse him by reassuring looks.  At the close Raffles
apologized for his preoccupation, called for an A.B.C.  time-table, and
announced his intention of catching the 3.2 to Esher.

"You must excuse me, Mr. Addenbrooke," said he, "but I have my own
idea, and for the moment I should much prefer to keep it to myself.  It
may end in fizzle, so I would rather not speak about it to either of
you just yet.  But speak to Sir Bernard I must, so will you write me
one line to him on your card?  Of course, if you wish, you must come
down with me and hear what I say; but I really don't see much point in
it."

And as usual Raffles had his way, though Bennett Addenbrooke showed
some temper when he was gone, and I myself shared his annoyance to no
small extent.  I could only tell him that it was in the nature of
Raffles to be self-willed and secretive, but that no man of my
acquaintance had half his audacity and determination; that I for my
part would trust him through and through, and let him gang his own gait
every time.  More I dared not say, even to remove those chill
misgivings with which I knew that the lawyer went his way.

That day I saw no more of Raffles, but a telegram reached me when I was
dressing for dinner:

"Be in your rooms to-morrow from noon and keep rest of day clear,
Raffles."

 It had been sent off from Waterloo at 6.42.

So Raffles was back in town; at an earlier stage of our relations I
should have hunted him up then and there, but now I knew better.  His
telegram meant that he had no desire for my society that night or the
following forenoon; that when he wanted me I should see him soon enough.

And see him I did, towards one o'clock next day. I was watching for him
from my window in Mount Street, when he drove up furiously in a hansom,
and jumped out without a word to the man.  I met him next minute at the
lift gates, and he fairly pushed me back into my rooms.

"Five minutes, Bunny!" he cried.  "Not a moment more."

And he tore off his coat before flinging himself into the nearest chair.

"I'm fairly on the rush," he panted; "having the very devil of a time!
Not a word till I tell you all I've done.  I settled my plan of
campaign yesterday at lunch.  The first thing was to get in with this
man Craggs; you can't break into a place like the Metropole, it's got
to be done from the inside.  Problem one, how to get at the fellow.
Only one sort of pretext would do--it must be something to do with this
blessed picture, so that I might see where he'd got it and all that.
Well, I couldn't go and ask to see it out of curiosity, and I couldn't
go as a second representative of the other old chap, and it was
thinking how I could go that made me such a bear at lunch.  But I saw
my way before we got up.  If I could only lay hold of a copy of the
picture I might ask leave to go and compare it with the original.  So
down I went to Esher to find out if there was a copy in existence, and
was at Broom Hall for one hour and a half yesterday afternoon.  There
was no copy there, but they must exist, for Sir Bernard himself
(there's 'copy' THERE!) has allowed a couple to be made since the
picture has been in his possession. He hunted up the painters'
addresses, and the rest of the evening I spent in hunting up the
painters themselves; but their work had been done on commission; one
copy had gone out of the country, and I'm still on the track of the
other."

"Then you haven't seen Craggs yet?"

"Seen him and made friends with him, and if possible he's the funnier
old cuss of the two; but you should study 'em both.  I took the bull by
the horns this morning, went in and lied like Ananias, and it was just
as well I did--the old ruffian sails for Australia by to-morrow's boat.
I told him a man wanted to sell me a copy of the celebrated Infanta
Maria Teresa of Velasquez, that I'd been down to the supposed owner of
the picture, only to find that he had just sold it to him.  You should
have seen his face when I told him that!  He grinned all round his
wicked old head.  'Did OLD Debenham admit the sale?' says he; and when
I said he had he chuckled to himself for about five minutes.  He was so
pleased that he did just what I hoped he would do; he showed me the
great picture--luckily it isn't by any means a large one--also the case
he's got it in.  It's an iron map-case in which he brought over the
plans of his land in Brisbane; he wants to know who would suspect it of
containing an Old Master, too?  But he's had it fitted with a new
Chubb's lock, and I managed to take an interest in the key while he was
gloating over the canvas.  I had the wax in the palm of my hand, and I
shall make my duplicate this afternoon."

Raffles looked at his watch and jumped up saying he had given me a
minute too much.

"By the way," he added, "you've got to dine with him at the Metropole
to-night!"

"I?"

"Yes; don't look so scared.  Both of us are invited--I swore you were
dining with me.  I accepted for us both; but I sha'n't be there."

His clear eye was upon me, bright with meaning and with mischief.

I implored him to tell me what his meaning was.

"You will dine in his private sitting-room," said Raffles; "it adjoins
his bedroom.  You must keep him sitting as long as possible, Bunny, and
talking all the time!"

In a flash I saw his plan.

"You're going for the picture while we're at dinner?"

"I am."

"If he hears you?"

"He sha'n't."

"But if he does!"

And I fairly trembled at the thought.

"If he does," said Raffles, "there will be a collision, that's all.
Revolver would be out of place in the Metropole, but I shall certainly
take a life-preserver."

"But it's ghastly!" I cried.  "To sit and talk to an utter stranger and
to know that you're at work in the next room!"

"Two thousand apiece," said Raffles, quietly.

"Upon my soul I believe I shall give it away!"

"Not you, Bunny.  I know you better than you know yourself."

He put on his coat and his hat.

"What time have I to be there?" I asked him, with a groan.

"Quarter to eight.  There will be a telegram from me saying I can't
turn up.  He's a terror to talk, you'll have no difficulty in keeping
the ball rolling; but head him off his picture for all you're worth.
If he offers to show it to you, say you must go.  He locked up the case
elaborately this afternoon, and there's no earthly reason why he should
unlock it again in this hemisphere."

"Where shall I find you when I get away?"

"I shall be down at Esher.  I hope to catch the 9.55."

"But surely I can see you again this afternoon?" I cried in a ferment,
for his hand was on the door.  "I'm not half coached up yet!  I know I
shall make a mess of it!"

"Not you," he said again, "but _I_ shall if I waste any more time.
I've got a deuce of a lot of rushing about to do yet.  You won't find
me at my rooms.  Why not come down to Esher yourself by the last train?
That's it--down you come with the latest news!  I'll tell old Debenham
to expect you: he shall give us both a bed.  By Jove! he won't be able
to do us too well if he's got his picture."

"If!" I groaned as he nodded his adieu; and he left me limp with
apprehension, sick with fear, in a perfectly pitiable condition of pure
stage-fright.

For, after all, I had only to act my part; unless Raffles failed where
he never did fail, unless Raffles the neat and noiseless was for once
clumsy and inept, all I had to do was indeed to "smile and smile and be
a villain."  I practiced that smile half the afternoon.  I rehearsed
putative parts in hypothetical conversations.  I got up stories.  I
dipped in a book on Queensland at the club.  And at last it was 7.45,
and I was making my bow to a somewhat elderly man with a small bald
head and a retreating brow.

"So you're Mr. Raffles's friend?" said he, overhauling me rather rudely
with his light small eyes. "Seen anything of him?  Expected him early
to show me something, but he's never come."

No more, evidently, had his telegram, and my troubles were beginning
early.  I said I had not seen Raffles since one o'clock, telling the
truth with unction while I could; even as we spoke there came a knock
at the door; it was the telegram at last, and, after reading it
himself, the Queenslander handed it to me.

"Called out of town!" he grumbled.  "Sudden illness of near relative!
What near relatives has he got?"

I knew of none, and for an instant I quailed before the perils of
invention; then I replied that I had never met any of his people, and
again felt fortified by my veracity.

"Thought you were bosom pals?" said he, with (as I imagined) a gleam of
suspicion in his crafty little eyes.

"Only in town," said I.  "I've never been to his place."

"Well," he growled, "I suppose it can't be helped.  Don't know why he
couldn't come and have his dinner first.  Like to see the death-bed I'D
go to without MY dinner; it's a full-skin billet, if you ask me.  Well,
must just dine without him, and he'll have to buy his pig in a poke
after all.  Mind touching that bell?  Suppose you know what he came to
see me about?  Sorry I sha'n't see him again, for his own sake.  I
liked Raffles--took to him amazingly.  He's a cynic.  Like cynics.  One
myself.  Rank bad form of his mother or his aunt, and I hope she will
go and kick the bucket."

I connect these specimens of his conversation, though they were
doubtless detached at the time, and interspersed with remarks of mine
here and there.  They filled the interval until dinner was served, and
they gave me an impression of the man which his every subsequent
utterance confirmed.  It was an impression which did away with all
remorse for my treacherous presence at his table.  He was that terrible
type, the Silly Cynic, his aim a caustic commentary on all things and
all men, his achievement mere vulgar irreverence and unintelligent
scorn.  Ill-bred and ill-informed, he had (on his own showing) fluked
into fortune on a rise in land; yet cunning he possessed, as well as
malice, and he chuckled till he choked over the misfortunes of less
astute speculators in the same boom.  Even now I cannot feel much
compunction for my behavior by the Hon. J. M. Craggs, M.L.C.

But never shall I forget the private agonies of the situation, the
listening to my host with one ear and for Raffles with the other!  Once
I heard him--though the rooms were not divided by the old-fashioned
folding-doors, and though the door that did divide them was not only
shut but richly curtained, I could have sworn I heard him once.  I
spilt my wine and laughed at the top of my voice at some coarse sally
of my host's.  And I heard nothing more, though my ears were on the
strain. But later, to my horror, when the waiter had finally withdrawn,
Craggs himself sprang up and rushed to his bedroom without a word.  I
sat like stone till he returned.

"Thought I heard a door go," he said.  "Must have been mistaken ...
imagination ... gave me quite a turn.  Raffles tell you priceless
treasure I got in there?"

It was the picture at last; up to this point I had kept him to
Queensland and the making of his pile. I tried to get him back there
now, but in vain.  He was reminded of his great ill-gotten possession.
I said that Raffles had just mentioned it, and that set him off.  With
the confidential garrulity of a man who has dined too well, he plunged
into his darling topic, and I looked past him at the clock.  It was
only a quarter to ten.

In common decency I could not go yet.  So there I sat (we were still at
port) and learnt what had originally fired my host's ambition to
possess what he was pleased to call a "real, genuine, twin-screw,
double-funnelled, copper-bottomed Old Master"; it was to "go one
better" than some rival legislator of pictorial proclivities.  But even
an epitome of his monologue would be so much weariness; suffice it that
it ended inevitably in the invitation I had dreaded all the evening.

"But you must see it.  Next room.  This way."

"Isn't it packed up?" I inquired hastily.

"Lock and key.  That's all."

"Pray don't trouble," I urged.

"Trouble be hanged!" said he.  "Come along."

And all at once I saw that to resist him further would be to heap
suspicion upon myself against the moment of impending discovery.  I
therefore followed him into his bedroom without further protest, and
suffered him first to show me the iron map-case which stood in one
corner; he took a crafty pride in this receptacle, and I thought he
would never cease descanting on its innocent appearance and its Chubb's
lock.  It seemed an interminable age before the key was in the latter.
Then the ward clicked, and my pulse stood still.

"By Jove!" I cried next instant.

The canvas was in its place among the maps!

"Thought it would knock you," said Craggs, drawing it out and unrolling
it for my benefit. "Grand thing, ain't it?  Wouldn't think it had been
painted two hundred and thirty years?  It has, though, MY word!  Old
Johnson's face will be a treat when he sees it; won't go bragging about
HIS pictures much more.  Why, this one's worth all the pictures in
Colony o' Queensland put together.  Worth fifty thousand pounds, my
boy--and I got it for five!"

He dug me in the ribs, and seemed in the mood for further confidences.
My appearance checked him, and he rubbed his hands.

"If you take it like that," he chuckled, "how will old Johnson take it?
Go out and hang himself to his own picture-rods, I hope!"

Heaven knows what I contrived to say at last. Struck speechless first
by my relief, I continued silent from a very different cause.  A new
tangle of emotions tied my tongue.  Raffles had failed--Raffles had
failed!  Could I not succeed?  Was it too late?  Was there no way?

"So long," he said, taking a last look at the canvas before he rolled
it up--"so long till we get to Brisbane."

The flutter I was in as he closed the case!

"For the last time," he went on, as his keys jingled back into his
pocket.  "It goes straight into the strong-room on board."

For the last time!  If I could but send him out to Australia with only
its legitimate contents in his precious map-case!  If I could but
succeed where Raffles had failed!

We returned to the other room.  I have no notion how long he talked, or
what about.  Whiskey and soda-water became the order of the hour.  I
scarcely touched it, but he drank copiously, and before eleven I left
him incoherent. And the last train for Esher was the 11.50 out of
Waterloo.

I took a hansom to my rooms.  I was back at the hotel in thirteen
minutes.  I walked upstairs. The corridor was empty; I stood an instant
on the sitting-room threshold, heard a snore within, and admitted
myself softly with my gentleman's own key, which it had been a very
simple matter to take away with me.

Craggs never moved; he was stretched on the sofa fast asleep.  But not
fast enough for me.  I saturated my handkerchief with the chloroform I
had brought, and laid it gently over his mouth. Two or three stertorous
breaths, and the man was a log.

I removed the handkerchief; I extracted the keys from his pocket.

In less than five minutes I put them back, after winding the picture
about my body beneath my Inverness cape.  I took some whiskey and
soda-water before I went.

The train was easily caught--so easily that I trembled for ten minutes
in my first-class smoking carriage--in terror of every footstep on the
platform, in unreasonable terror till the end.  Then at last I sat back
and lit a cigarette, and the lights of Waterloo reeled out behind.

Some men were returning from the theatre.  I can recall their
conversation even now.  They were disappointed with the piece they had
seen. It was one of the later Savoy operas, and they spoke wistfully of
the days of "Pinafore" and "Patience."  One of them hummed a stave, and
there was an argument as to whether the air was out of "Patience" or
the "Mikado."  They all got out at Surbiton, and I was alone with my
triumph for a few intoxicating minutes.  To think that I had succeeded
where Raffles had failed!

Of all our adventures this was the first in which I had played a
commanding part; and, of them all, this was infinitely the least
discreditable.  It left me without a conscientious qualm; I had but
robbed a robber, when all was said.  And I had done it myself,
single-handed--ipse egomet!

I pictured Raffles, his surprise, his delight.  He would think a little
more of me in future.  And that future, it should be different.  We had
two thousand pounds apiece--surely enough to start afresh as honest
men--and all through me!

In a glow I sprang out at Esher, and took the one belated cab that was
waiting under the bridge. In a perfect fever I beheld Broom Hall, with
the lower story still lit up, and saw the front door open as I climbed
the steps.

"Thought it was you," said Raffles cheerily. "It's all right.  There's
a bed for you.  Sir Bernard's sitting up to shake your hand."

His good spirits disappointed me.  But I knew the man: he was one of
those who wear their brightest smile in the blackest hour.  I knew him
too well by this time to be deceived.

"I've got it!" I cried in his ear.  "I've got it!"

"Got what?" he asked me, stepping back.

"The picture!"

"WHAT?"

"The picture.  He showed it me.  You had to go without it; I saw that.
So I determined to have it.  And here it is."

"Let's see," said Raffles grimly.

I threw off my cape and unwound the canvas from about my body.  While I
was doing so an untidy old gentleman made his appearance in the hall,
and stood looking on with raised eyebrows.

"Looks pretty fresh for an Old Master, doesn't she?" said Raffles.

His tone was strange.  I could only suppose that he was jealous of my
success.

"So Craggs said.  I hardly looked at it myself."

"Well, look now--look closely.  By Jove, I must have faked her better
than I thought!"

"It's a copy!" I cried.

"It's THE copy," he answered.  "It's the copy I've been tearing all
over the country to procure.  It's the copy I faked back and front, so
that, on your own showing, it imposed upon Craggs, and might have made
him happy for life.  And you go and rob him of that!"

I could not speak.

"How did you manage it?" inquired Sir Bernard Debenham.

"Have you killed him?" asked Raffles sardonically.

I did not look at him; I turned to Sir Bernard Debenham, and to him I
told my story, hoarsely, excitedly, for it was all that I could do to
keep from breaking down.  But as I spoke I became calmer, and I
finished in mere bitterness, with the remark that another time Raffles
might tell me what he meant to do.

"Another time!" he cried instantly.  "My dear Bunny, you speak as
though we were going to turn burglars for a living!"

"I trust you won't," said Sir Bernard, smiling, "for you are certainly
two very daring young men. Let us hope our friend from Queensland will
do as he said, and not open his map-case till he gets back there.  He
will find my check awaiting him, and I shall be very much surprised if
he troubles any of us again."

Raffles and I did not speak till I was in the room which had been
prepared for me.  Nor was I anxious to do so then.  But he followed me
and took my hand.

"Bunny," said he, "don't you be hard on a fellow!  I was in the deuce
of a hurry, and didn't know that I should ever get what I wanted in
time, and that's a fact.  But it serves me right that you should have
gone and undone one of the best things I ever did.  As for YOUR
handiwork, old chap, you won't mind my saying that I didn't think you
had it in you.  In future--"

"Don't talk to me about the future!" I cried. "I hate the whole thing!
I'm going to chuck it up!"

"So am I," said Raffles, "when I've made my pile."



THE RETURN MATCH

I had turned into Piccadilly, one thick evening in the following
November, when my guilty heart stood still at the sudden grip of a hand
upon my arm.  I thought--I was always thinking--that my inevitable hour
was come at last.  It was only Raffles, however, who stood smiling at
me through the fog.

"Well met!" said he.  "I've been looking for you at the club."

"I was just on my way there," I returned, with an attempt to hide my
tremors.  It was an ineffectual attempt, as I saw from his broader
smile, and by the indulgent shake of his head.

"Come up to my place instead," said he.  "I've something amusing to
tell you."

I made excuses, for his tone foretold the kind of amusement, and it was
a kind against which I had successfully set my face for months.  I have
stated before, however, and I can but reiterate, that to me, at all
events, there was never anybody in the world so irresistible as Raffles
when his mind was made up.  That we had both been independent of crime
since our little service to Sir Bernard Debenham--that there had been
no occasion for that masterful mind to be made up in any such direction
for many a day--was the undeniable basis of a longer spell of honesty
than I had hitherto enjoyed during the term of our mutual intimacy.  Be
sure I would deny it if I could; the very thing I am to tell you would
discredit such a boast.  I made my excuses, as I have said.

But his arm slid through mine, with his little laugh of light-hearted
mastery.  And even while I argued we were on his staircase in the
Albany.

His fire had fallen low.  He poked and replenished it after lighting
the gas.  As for me, I stood by sullenly in my overcoat until he
dragged it off my back.

"What a chap you are!" said Raffles, playfully. "One would really think
I had proposed to crack another crib this blessed night!  Well, it
isn't that, Bunny; so get into that chair, and take one of these
Sullivans and sit tight."

He held the match to my cigarette; he brought me a whiskey and soda.
Then he went out into the lobby, and, just as I was beginning to feel
happy, I heard a bolt shot home.  It cost me an effort to remain in
that chair; next moment he was straddling another and gloating over my
discomfiture across his folded arms.

"You remember Milchester, Bunny, old boy?"

His tone was as bland as mine was grim when I answered that I did.

"We had a little match there that wasn't down on the card.  Gentlemen
and Players, if you recollect?"

"I don't forget it."

"Seeing that you never got an innings, so to speak, I thought you
might.  Well, the Gentlemen scored pretty freely, but the Players were
all caught."

"Poor devils!"

"Don't be too sure.  You remember the fellow we saw in the inn?  The
florid, over-dressed chap who I told you was one of the cleverest
thieves in town?"

"I remember him.  Crawshay his name turned out to be."

"Well, it was certainly the name he was convicted under, so Crawshay
let it be.  You needn't waste any pity on HIM, old chap; he escaped
from Dartmoor yesterday afternoon."

"Well done!"

Raffles smiled, but his eyebrows had gone up, and his shoulders
followed suit.

"You are perfectly right; it was very well done indeed.  I wonder you
didn't see it in the paper. In a dense fog on the moor yesterday good
old Crawshay made a bolt for it, and got away without a scratch under
heavy fire.  All honor to him, I agree; a fellow with that much grit
deserves his liberty.  But Crawshay has a good deal more. They hunted
him all night long; couldn't find him for nuts; and that was all you
missed in the morning papers."

He unfolded a Pall Mall, which he had brought in with him.

"But listen to this; here's an account of the escape, with just the
addition which puts the thing on a higher level.  'The fugitive has
been traced to Totnes, where he appears to have committed a peculiarly
daring outrage in the early hours of this morning.  He is reported to
have entered the lodgings of the Rev.  A. H. Ellingworth, curate of the
parish, who missed his clothes on rising at the usual hour; later in
the morning those of the convict were discovered neatly folded at the
bottom of a drawer.  Meanwhile Crawshay had made good his second
escape, though it is believed that so distinctive a guise will lead to
his recapture during the day.'  What do you think of that, Bunny?"

"He is certainly a sportsman," said I, reaching for the paper.

"He's more," said Raffles, "he's an artist, and I envy him.  The
curate, of all men!  Beautiful--beautiful!  But that's not all.  I saw
just now on the board at the club that there's been an outrage on the
line near Dawlish.  Parson found insensible in the six-foot way.  Our
friend again!  The telegram doesn't say so, but it's obvious; he's
simply knocked some other fellow out, changed clothes again, and come
on gayly to town.  Isn't it great? I do believe it's the best thing of
the kind that's ever been done!"

"But why should he come to town?"

In an instant the enthusiasm faded from Raffles's face; clearly I had
reminded him of some prime anxiety, forgotten in his impersonal joy
over the exploit of a fellow-criminal.  He looked over his shoulder
towards the lobby before replying.

"I believe," said he, "that the beggar's on MY tracks!"

And as he spoke he was himself again--quietly amused--cynically
unperturbed--characteristically enjoying the situation and my surprise.

"But look here, what do you mean?" said I. "What does Crawshay know
about you?"

"Not much; but he suspects."

"Why should he?"

"Because, in his way he's very nearly as good a man as I am; because,
my dear Bunny, with eyes in his head and brains behind them, he
couldn't help suspecting.  He saw me once in town with old Baird.  He
must have seen me that day in the pub on the way to Milchester, as well
as afterwards on the cricket-field.  As a matter of fact, I know he
did, for he wrote and told me so before his trial."

"He wrote to you!  And you never told me!"

The old shrug answered the old grievance.

"What was the good, my dear fellow?  It would only have worried you."

"Well, what did he say?"

"That he was sorry he had been run in before getting back to town, as
he had proposed doing himself the honor of paying me a call; however,
he trusted it was only a pleasure deferred, and he begged me not to go
and get lagged myself before he came out.  Of course he knew the
Melrose necklace was gone, though he hadn't got it; and he said that
the man who could take that and leave the rest was a man after his own
heart.  And so on, with certain little proposals for the far future,
which I fear may be the very near future indeed! I'm only surprised he
hasn't turned up yet."

He looked again towards the lobby, which he had left in darkness, with
the inner door shut as carefully as the outer one.  I asked him what he
meant to do.

"Let him knock--if he gets so far.  The porter is to say I'm out of
town; it will be true, too, in another hour or so."

"You're going off to-night?"

"By the 7.15 from Liverpool Street.  I don't say much about my people,
Bunny, but I have the best of sisters married to a country parson in
the eastern counties.  They always make me welcome, and let me read the
lessons for the sake of getting me to church.  I'm sorry you won't be
there to hear me on Sunday, Bunny.  I've figured out some of my best
schemes in that parish, and I know of no better port in a storm.  But I
must pack.  I thought I'd just let you know where I was going, and why,
in case you cared to follow my example."

He flung the stump of his cigarette into the fire, stretched himself as
he rose, and remained so long in the inelegant attitude that my eyes
mounted from his body to his face; a second later they had followed his
eyes across the room, and I also was on my legs.  On the threshold of
the folding doors that divided bedroom and sitting-room, a well-built
man stood in ill-fitting broadcloth, and bowed to us until his bullet
head presented an unbroken disk of short red hair.

Brief as was my survey of this astounding apparition, the interval was
long enough for Raffles to recover his composure; his hands were in his
pockets, and a smile upon his face, when my eyes flew back to him.

"Let me introduce you, Bunny," said he, "to our distinguished
colleague, Mr. Reginald Crawshay."

The bullet head bobbed up, and there was a wrinkled brow above the
coarse, shaven face, crimson also, I remember, from the grip of a
collar several sizes too small.  But I noted nothing consciously at the
time.  I had jumped to my own conclusion, and I turned on Raffles with
an oath.

"It's a trick!" I cried.  "It's another of your cursed tricks!  You got
him here, and then you got me.  You want me to join you, I suppose?
I'll see you damned!"

So cold was the stare which met this outburst that I became ashamed of
my words while they were yet upon my lips.

"Really, Bunny!" said Raffles, and turned his shoulder with a shrug.

"Lord love yer," cried Crawshay, "'_E_ knew nothin'.  _'E_ didn't
expect me; 'E'S all right.  And you're the cool canary, YOU are," he
went on to Raffles.  "I knoo you were, but, do me proud, you're one
after my own kidney!"  And he thrust out a shaggy hand.

"After that," said Raffles, taking it, "what am I to say?  But you must
have heard my opinion of you.  I am proud to make your acquaintance.
How the deuce did you get in?"

"Never you mind," said Crawshay, loosening his collar; "let's talk
about how I'm to get out. Lord love yer, but that's better!"

There was a livid ring round his bull-neck, that he fingered tenderly.
"Didn't know how much longer I might have to play the gent," he
explained; "didn't know who you'd bring in."

"Drink whiskey and soda?" inquired Raffles, when the convict was in the
chair from which I had leapt.

"No, I drink it neat," replied Crawshay, "but I talk business first.
You don't get over me like that, Lor' love yer!"

"Well, then, what can I do for you?"

"You know without me tellin' you."

"Give it a name."

"Clean heels, then; that's what I want to show, and I leaves the way to
you.  We're brothers in arms, though I ain't armed this time.  It ain't
necessary.  You've too much sense.  But brothers we are, and you'll see
a brother through.  Let's put it at that.  You'll see me through in yer
own way.  I leaves it all to you."

His tone was rich with conciliation and concession; he bent over and
tore a pair of button boots from his bare feet, which he stretched
towards the fire, painfully uncurling his toes.

"I hope you take a larger size than them," said he.  "I'd have had a
see if you'd given me time. I wasn't in long afore you."

"And you won't tell me how you got in?"

"Wot's the use?  I can't teach YOU nothin'.  Besides, I want out.  I
want out of London, an' England, an' bloomin' Europe too.  That's all I
want of you, mister.  I don't arst how YOU go on the job.  You know
w'ere I come from, 'cos I 'eard you say; you know w'ere I want to 'ead
for, 'cos I've just told yer; the details I leaves entirely to you."

"Well," said Raffles, "we must see what can be done."

"We must," said Mr. Crawshay, and leaned back comfortably, and began
twirling his stubby thumbs.

Raffles turned to me with a twinkle in his eye; but his forehead was
scored with thought, and resolve mingled with resignation in the lines
of his mouth.  And he spoke exactly as though he and I were alone in
the room.

"You seize the situation, Bunny?  If our friend here is 'copped,' to
speak his language, he means to 'blow the gaff' on you and me.  He is
considerate enough not to say so in so many words, but it's plain
enough, and natural enough for that matter.  I would do the same in his
place.  We had the bulge before; he has it now; it's perfectly fair. We
must take on this job; we aren't in a position to refuse it; even if we
were, I should take it on!  Our friend is a great sportsman; he has got
clear away from Dartmoor; it would be a thousand pities to let him go
back.  Nor shall he; not if I can think of a way of getting him abroad."

"Any way you like," murmured Crawshay, with his eyes shut.  "I leaves
the 'ole thing to you."

"But you'll have to wake up and tell us things."

"All right, mister; but I'm fair on the rocks for a sleep!"

And he stood up, blinking.

"Think you were traced to town?"

"Must have been."

"And here?"

"Not in this fog--not with any luck."

Raffles went into the bedroom, lit the gas there, and returned next
minute.

"So you got in by the window?"

"That's about it."

"It was devilish smart of you to know which one; it beats me how you
brought it off in daylight, fog or no fog!  But let that pass.  You
don't think you were seen?"

"I don't think it, sir."

"Well, let's hope you are right.  I shall reconnoitre and soon find
out.  And you'd better come too, Bunny, and have something to eat and
talk it over."

As Raffles looked at me, I looked at Crawshay, anticipating trouble;
and trouble brewed in his blank, fierce face, in the glitter of his
startled eyes, in the sudden closing of his fists.

"And what's to become o' me?" he cried out with an oath.

"You wait here."

"No, you don't," he roared, and at a bound had his back to the door.
"You don't get round me like that, you cuckoos!"

Raffles turned to me with a twitch of the shoulders.  "That's the worst
of these professors," said he; "they never will use their heads.  They
see the pegs, and they mean to hit 'em; but that's all they do see and
mean, and they think we're the same.  No wonder we licked them last
time!"

"Don't talk through yer neck," snarled the convict.  "Talk out
straight, curse you!"

"Right," said Raffles.  "I'll talk as straight as you like.  You say
you put yourself in my hands--you leave it all to me--yet you don't
trust me an inch!  I know what's to happen if I fail.  I accept the
risk.  I take this thing on.  Yet you think I'm going straight out to
give you away and make you give me away in my turn.  You're a fool, Mr.
Crawshay, though you have broken Dartmoor; you've got to listen to a
better man, and obey him. I see you through in my own way, or not at
all. I come and go as I like, and with whom I like, without your
interference; you stay here and lie just as low as you know how, be as
wise as your word, and leave the whole thing to me.  If you won't--if
you're fool enough not to trust me--there's the door.  Go out and say
what you like, and be damned to you!"

Crawshay slapped his thigh.

"That's talking!" said he.  "Lord love yer, I know where I am when you
talk like that.  I'll trust yer.  I know a man when he gets his tongue
between his teeth; you're all right.  I don't say so much about this
other gent, though I saw him along with you on the job that time in the
provinces; but if he's a pal of yours, Mr. Raffles, he'll be all right
too.  I only hope you gents ain't too stony--"

And he touched his pockets with a rueful face.

"I only went for their togs," said he.  "You never struck two such
stony-broke cusses in yer life!"

"That's all right," said Raffles.  "We'll see you through properly.
Leave it to us, and you sit tight."

"Rightum!" said Crawshay.  "And I'll have a sleep time you're gone.
But no sperrits--no, thank'ee--not yet!  Once let me loose on the lush,
and, Lord love yer, I'm a gone coon!"

Raffles got his overcoat, a long, light driving-coat, I remember, and
even as he put it on our fugitive was dozing in the chair; we left him
murmuring incoherently, with the gas out, and his bare feet toasting.

"Not such a bad chap, that professor," said Raffles on the stairs; "a
real genius in his way, too, though his methods are a little elementary
for my taste.  But technique isn't everything; to get out of Dartmoor
and into the Albany in the same twenty-four hours is a whole that
justifies its parts.  Good Lord!"

We had passed a man in the foggy courtyard, and Raffles had nipped my
arm.

"Who was it?"

"The last man we want to see!  I hope to heaven he didn't hear me!"

"But who is he, Raffles?"

"Our old friend Mackenzie, from the Yard!"

I stood still with horror.

"Do you think he's on Crawshay's track?"

"I don't know.  I'll find out."

And before I could remonstrate he had wheeled me round; when I found my
voice he merely laughed, and whispered that the bold course was the
safe one every time.

"But it's madness--"

"Not it.  Shut up!  Is that YOU, Mr. Mackenzie?"

The detective turned about and scrutinized us keenly; and through the
gaslit mist I noticed that his hair was grizzled at the temples, and
his face still cadaverous, from the wound that had nearly been his
death.

"Ye have the advantage o' me, sirs," said he.

"I hope you're fit again," said my companion. "My name is Raffles, and
we met at Milchester last year."

"Is that a fact?" cried the Scotchman, with quite a start.  "Yes, now I
remember your face, and yours too, sir.  Ay, yon was a bad business,
but it ended vera well, an' that's the main thing."

His native caution had returned to him.  Raffles pinched my arm.

"Yes, it ended splendidly, but for you," said he. "But what about this
escape of the leader of the gang, that fellow Crawshay?  What do you
think of that, eh?"

"I havena the parteeculars," replied the Scot.

"Good!" cried Raffles.  "I was only afraid you might be on his tracks
once more!"

Mackenzie shook his head with a dry smile, and wished us good evening
as an invisible window was thrown up, and a whistle blown softly
through the fog.

"We must see this out," whispered Raffles. "Nothing more natural than a
little curiosity on our part.  After him, quick!"

And we followed the detective into another entrance on the same side as
that from which we had emerged, the left-hand side on one's way to
Piccadilly; quite openly we followed him, and at the foot of the stairs
met one of the porters of the place.  Raffles asked him what was wrong.

"Nothing, sir," said the fellow glibly.

"Rot!" said Raffles.  "That was Mackenzie, the detective.  I've just
been speaking to him. What's he here for?  Come on, my good fellow; we
won't give you away, if you've instructions not to tell."

The man looked quaintly wistful, the temptation of an audience hot upon
him; a door shut upstairs, and he fell.

"It's like this," he whispered.  "This afternoon a gen'leman comes
arfter rooms, and I sent him to the orfice; one of the clurks, 'e goes
round with 'im an' shows 'im the empties, an' the gen'leman's partic'ly
struck on the set the coppers is up in now.  So he sends the clurk to
fetch the manager, as there was one or two things he wished to speak
about; an' when they come back, blowed if the gent isn't gone!  Beg yer
pardon, sir, but he's clean disappeared off the face o' the premises!"
And the porter looked at us with shining eyes.

"Well?" said Raffles.

"Well, sir, they looked about, an' looked about, an' at larst they give
him up for a bad job; thought he'd changed his mind an' didn't want to
tip the clurk; so they shut up the place an' come away. An' that's all
till about 'alf an hour ago, when I takes the manager his extry-speshul
Star; in about ten minutes he comes running out with a note, an' sends
me with it to Scotland Yard in a hansom. An' that's all I know,
sir--straight.  The coppers is up there now, and the tec, and the
manager, and they think their gent is about the place somewhere still.
Least, I reckon that's their idea; but who he is, or what they want him
for, I dunno."

"Jolly interesting!" said Raffles.  "I'm going up to inquire.  Come on,
Bunny; there should be some fun."

"Beg yer pardon, Mr. Raffles, but you won't say nothing about me?"

"Not I; you're a good fellow.  I won't forget it if this leads to
sport.  Sport!" he whispered as we reached the landing.  "It looks like
precious poor sport for you and me, Bunny!"

"What are you going to do?"

"I don't know.  There's no time to think.  This, to start with."

And he thundered on the shut door; a policeman opened it.  Raffles
strode past him with the air of a chief commissioner, and I followed
before the man had recovered from his astonishment.  The bare boards
rang under us; in the bedroom we found a knot of officers stooping over
the window-ledge with a constable's lantern.  Mackenzie was the first
to stand upright, and he greeted us with a glare.

"May I ask what you gentlemen want?" said he.

"We want to lend a hand," said Raffles briskly. "We lent one once
before, and it was my friend here who took over from you the fellow who
split on all the rest, and held him tightly.  Surely that entitles him,
at all events, to see any fun that's going?  As for myself, well, it's
true I only helped to carry you to the house; but for old acquaintance
I do hope, my dear Mr. Mackenzie, that you will permit us to share such
sport as there may be.  I myself can only stop a few minutes, in any
case."

"Then ye'll not see much," growled the detective, "for he's not up
here.  Constable, go you and stand at the foot o' the stairs, and let
no other body come up on any conseederation; these gentlemen may be
able to help us after all."

"That's kind of you, Mackenzie!" cried Raffles warmly.  "But what is it
all?  I questioned a porter I met coming down, but could get nothing
out of him, except that somebody had been to see these rooms and not
since been seen himself."

"He's a man we want," said Mackenzie.  "He's concealed himself
somewhere about these premises, or I'm vera much mistaken.  D'ye reside
in the Albany, Mr. Raffles?"

"I do."

"Will your rooms be near these?"

"On the next staircase but one."

"Ye'll just have left them?"

"Just."

"Been in all the afternoon, likely?"

"Not all."

"Then I may have to search your rooms, sir.  I am prepared to search
every room in the Albany!  Our man seems to have gone for the leads;
but unless he's left more marks outside than in, or we find him up
there, I shall have the entire building to ransack."

"I will leave you my key," said Raffles at once. "I am dining out, but
I'll leave it with the officer down below."

I caught my breath in mute amazement.  What was the meaning of this
insane promise?  It was wilful, gratuitous, suicidal; it made me catch
at his sleeve in open horror and disgust; but, with a word of thanks,
Mackenzie had returned to his window-sill, and we sauntered unwatched
through the folding-doors into the adjoining room.  Here the window
looked down into the courtyard; it was still open; and as we gazed out
in apparent idleness, Raffles reassured me.

"It's all right, Bunny; you do what I tell you and leave the rest to
me.  It's a tight corner, but I don't despair.  What you've got to do
is to stick to these chaps, especially if they search my rooms; they
mustn't poke about more than necessary, and they won't if you're there."

"But where will you be?  You're never going to leave me to be landed
alone?"

"If I do, it will be to turn up trumps at the right moment.  Besides,
there are such things as windows, and Crawshay's the man to take his
risks.  You must trust me, Bunny; you've known me long enough."

"Are you going now?"

"There's no time to lose.  Stick to them, old chap; don't let them
suspect YOU, whatever else you do."  His hand lay an instant on my
shoulder; then he left me at the window, and recrossed the room.

"I've got to go now," I heard him say; "but my friend will stay and see
this through, and I'll leave the gas on in my rooms, and my key with
the constable downstairs.  Good luck, Mackenzie; only wish I could
stay."

"Good-by, sir," came in a preoccupied voice, "and many thanks."

Mackenzie was still busy at his window, and I remained at mine, a prey
to mingled fear and wrath, for all my knowledge of Raffles and of his
infinite resource.  By this time I felt that I knew more or less what
he would do in any given emergency; at least I could conjecture a
characteristic course of equal cunning and audacity.  He would return
to his rooms, put Crawshay on his guard, and--stow him away?  No--there
were such things as windows.  Then why was Raffles going to desert us
all?  I thought of many things--lastly of a cab.  These bedroom windows
looked into a narrow side-street; they were not very high; from them a
man might drop on to the roof of a cab--even as it passed--and be
driven away even under the noses of the police!  I pictured Raffles
driving that cab, unrecognizable in the foggy night; the vision came to
me as he passed under the window, tucking up the collar of his great
driving-coat on the way to his rooms; it was still with me when he
passed again on his way back, and stopped to hand the constable his key.

"We're on his track," said a voice behind me. "He's got up on the
leads, sure enough, though how he managed it from yon window is a
myst'ry to me.  We're going to lock up here and try what like it is
from the attics.  So you'd better come with us if you've a mind."

The top floor at the Albany, as elsewhere, is devoted to the
servants--a congeries of little kitchens and cubicles, used by many as
lumber-rooms--by Raffles among the many.  The annex in this case was,
of course, empty as the rooms below; and that was lucky, for we filled
it, what with the manager, who now joined us, and another tenant whom
he brought with him to Mackenzie's undisguised annoyance.

"Better let in all Piccadilly at a crown a head," said he.  "Here, my
man, out you go on the roof to make one less, and have your truncheon
handy."

We crowded to the little window, which Mackenzie took care to fill; and
a minute yielded no sound but the crunch and slither of constabulary
boots upon sooty slates.  Then came a shout.

"What now?" cried Mackenzie.

"A rope," we heard, "hanging from the spout by a hook!"

"Sirs," purred Mackenzie, "yon's how he got up from below!  He would do
it with one o' they telescope sticks, an' I never thocht o't!  How long
a rope, my lad?"

"Quite short.  I've got it."

"Did it hang over a window?  Ask him that!" cried the manager.  "He can
see by leaning over the parapet."

The question was repeated by Mackenzie; a pause, then "Yes, it did."

"Ask him how many windows along!" shouted the manager in high
excitement.

"Six, he says," said Mackenzie next minute; and he drew in his head and
shoulders.  "I should just like to see those rooms, six windows along."

"Mr. Raffles," announced the manager after a mental calculation.

"Is that a fact?" cried Mackenzie.  "Then we shall have no difficulty
at all.  He's left me his key down below."

The words had a dry, speculative intonation, which even then I found
time to dislike; it was as though the coincidence had already struck
the Scotchman as something more.

"Where is Mr. Raffles?" asked the manager, as we all filed downstairs.

"He's gone out to his dinner," said Mackenzie.

"Are you sure?"

"I saw him go," said I.  My heart was beating horribly.  I would not
trust myself to speak again. But I wormed my way to a front place in
the little procession, and was, in fact, the second man to cross the
threshold that had been the Rubicon of my life.  As I did so I uttered
a cry of pain, for Mackenzie had trod back heavily on my toes; in
another second I saw the reason, and saw it with another and a louder
cry.

A man was lying at full length before the fire on his back, with a
little wound in the white forehead, and the blood draining into his
eyes.  And the man was Raffles himself!

"Suicide," said Mackenzie calmly.  "No--here's the poker--looks more
like murder."  He went on his knees and shook his head quite
cheerfully.  "An' it's not even murder," said he, with a shade of
disgust in his matter-of-fact voice; "yon's no more than a flesh-wound,
and I have my doubts whether it felled him; but, sirs, he just stinks
o' chloryform!"

He got up and fixed his keen gray eyes upon me; my own were full of
tears, but they faced him unashamed.

"I understood ye to say ye saw him go out?" said he sternly.

"I saw that long driving-coat; of course, I thought he was inside it."

"And I could ha' sworn it was the same gent when he give me the key!"

It was the disconsolate voice of the constable in the background; on
him turned Mackenzie, white to the lips.

"You'd think anything, some of you damned policemen," said he.  "What's
your number, you rotter?  P 34?  You'll be hearing more of this, Mr. P
34!  If that gentleman was dead--instead of coming to himself while I'm
talking--do you know what you'd be?  Guilty of his manslaughter, you
stuck pig in buttons!  Do you know who you've let slip, butter-fingers?
Crawshay--no less--him that broke Dartmoor yesterday.  By the God that
made ye, P 34, if I lose him I'll hound ye from the forrce!"

Working face--shaking fist--a calm man on fire.  It was a new side of
Mackenzie, and one to mark and to digest.  Next moment he had flounced
from our midst.


"Difficult thing to break your own head," said Raffles later;
"infinitely easier to cut your own throat.  Chloroform's another
matter; when you've used it on others, you know the dose to a nicety.
So you thought I was really gone?  Poor old Bunny!  But I hope
Mackenzie saw your face?"

"He did," said I.  I would not tell him all Mackenzie must have seen,
however.

"That's all right.  I wouldn't have had him miss it for worlds; and you
mustn't think me a brute, old boy, for I fear that man, and, know, we
sink or swim together."

"And now we sink or swim with Crawshay, too," said I dolefully.

"Not we!" said Raffles with conviction.  "Old Crawshay's a true
sportsman, and he'll do by us as we've done by him; besides, this makes
us quits; and I don't think, Bunny, that we'll take on the professors
again!"



THE GIFT OF THE EMPEROR

I

When the King of the Cannibal Islands made faces at Queen Victoria, and
a European monarch set the cables tingling with his compliments on the
exploit, the indignation in England was not less than the surprise, for
the thing was not so common as it has since become.  But when it
transpired that a gift of peculiar significance was to follow the
congratulations, to give them weight, the inference prevailed that the
white potentate and the black had taken simultaneous leave of their
fourteen senses.  For the gift was a pearl of price unparalleled,
picked aforetime by British cutlasses from a Polynesian setting, and
presented by British royalty to the sovereign who seized this
opportunity of restoring it to its original possessor.

The incident would have been a godsend to the Press a few weeks later.
Even in June there were leaders, letters, large headlines, leaded type;
the Daily Chronicle devoting half its literary page to a charming
drawing of the island capital which the new Pall Mall, in a leading
article headed by a pun, advised the Government to blow to flinders. I
was myself driving a poor but not dishonest quill at the time, and the
topic of the hour goaded me into satiric verse which obtained a better
place than anything I had yet turned out.  I had let my flat in town,
and taken inexpensive quarters at Thames Ditton, on the plea of a
disinterested passion for the river.

"First-rate, old boy!" said Raffles (who must needs come and see me
there), lying back in the boat while I sculled and steered.  "I suppose
they pay you pretty well for these, eh?"

"Not a penny."

"Nonsense, Bunny!  I thought they paid so well?  Give them time, and
you'll get your check."

"Oh, no, I sha'n't," said I gloomily.  "I've got to be content with the
honor of getting in; the editor wrote to say so, in so many words," I
added.  But I gave the gentleman his distinguished name.

"You don't mean to say you've written for payment already?"

No; it was the last thing I had intended to admit.  But I had done it.
The murder was out; there was no sense in further concealment.  I had
written for my money because I really needed it; if he must know, I was
cursedly hard up.  Raffles nodded as though he knew already.  I warmed
to my woes.  It was no easy matter to keep your end up as a raw
freelance of letters; for my part, I was afraid I wrote neither well
enough nor ill enough for success.  I suffered from a persistent
ineffectual feeling after style.  Verse I could manage; but it did not
pay.  To personal paragraphs and the baser journalism I could not and I
would not stoop.

Raffles nodded again, this time with a smile that stayed in his eyes as
he leant back watching me. I knew that he was thinking of other things
I had stooped to, and I thought I knew what he was going to say.  He
had said it before so often; he was sure to say it again.  I had my
answer ready, but evidently he was tired of asking the same question.
His lids fell, he took up the paper he had dropped, and I sculled the
length of the old red wall of Hampton Court before he spoke again.

"And they gave you nothing for these!  My dear Bunny, they're capital,
not only qua verses but for crystallizing your subject and putting it
in a nutshell.  Certainly you've taught ME more about it than I knew
before.  But is it really worth fifty thousand pounds--a single pearl?"

"A hundred, I believe; but that wouldn't scan."

"A hundred thousand pounds!" said Raffles, with his eyes shut.  And
again I made certain what was coming, but again I was mistaken.  "If
it's worth all that," he cried at last, "there would be no getting rid
of it at all; it's not like a diamond that you can subdivide.  But I
beg your pardon, Bunny.  I was forgetting!"

And we said no more about the emperor's gift; for pride thrives on an
empty pocket, and no privation would have drawn from me the proposal
which I had expected Raffles to make.  My expectation had been half a
hope, though I only knew it now.  But neither did we touch again on
what Raffles professed to have forgotten--my "apostasy," my "lapse into
virtue," as he had been pleased to call it.  We were both a little
silent, a little constrained, each preoccupied with his own thoughts.
It was months since we had met, and, as I saw him off towards eleven
o'clock that Sunday night, I fancied it was for more months that we
were saying good-by.

But as we waited for the train I saw those clear eyes peering at me
under the station lamps, and when I met their glance Raffles shook his
head.

"You don't look well on it, Bunny," said he. "I never did believe in
this Thames Valley.  You want a change of air."

I wished I might get it.

"What you really want is a sea voyage."

"And a winter at St. Moritz, or do you recommend Cannes or Cairo?  It's
all very well, A. J., but you forget what I told you about my funds."

"I forget nothing.  I merely don't want to hurt your feelings.  But,
look here, a sea voyage you shall have.  I want a change myself, and
you shall come with me as my guest.  We'll spend July in the
Mediterranean."

"But you're playing cricket--"

"Hang the cricket!"

"Well, if I thought you meant it--"

"Of course I mean it.  Will you come?"

"Like a shot--if you go."

And I shook his hand, and waved mine in farewell, with the perfectly
good-humored conviction that I should hear no more of the matter.  It
was a passing thought, no more, no less.  I soon wished it were more;
that week found me wishing myself out of England for good and all.  I
was making nothing.  I could but subsist on the difference between the
rent I paid for my flat and the rent at which I had sublet it,
furnished, for the season.  And the season was near its end, and
creditors awaited me in town.  Was it possible to be entirely honest?
I had run no bills when I had money in my pocket, and the more
downright dishonesty seemed to me the less ignoble.

But from Raffles, of course, I heard nothing more; a week went by, and
half another week; then, late on the second Wednesday night, I found a
telegram from him at my lodgings, after seeking him vainly in town, and
dining with desperation at the solitary club to which I still belonged.

"Arrange to leave Waterloo by North German Lloyd special," he wired,
"9.25 A. M. Monday next will meet you Southampton aboard Uhlan with
tickets am writing."

And write he did, a light-hearted letter enough, but full of serious
solicitude for me and for my health and prospects; a letter almost
touching in the light of our past relations, in the twilight of their
complete rupture.  He said that he had booked two berths to Naples,
that we were bound for Capri, which was clearly the island of the
Lotos-eaters, that we would bask there together, "and for a while
forget."  It was a charming letter.  I had never seen Italy; the
privilege of initiation should be his.  No mistake was greater than to
deem it an impossible country for the summer. The Bay of Naples was
never so divine, and he wrote of "faery lands forlorn," as though the
poetry sprang unbidden to his pen.  To come back to earth and prose, I
might think it unpatriotic of him to choose a German boat, but on no
other line did you receive such attention and accommodation for your
money.  There was a hint of better reasons.  Raffles wrote, as he had
telegraphed, from Bremen; and I gathered that the personal use of some
little influence with the authorities there had resulted in a material
reduction in our fares.

Imagine my excitement and delight!  I managed to pay what I owed at
Thames Ditton, to squeeze a small editor for a very small check, and my
tailors for one more flannel suit.  I remember that I broke my last
sovereign to get a box of Sullivan's cigarettes for Raffles to smoke on
the voyage.  But my heart was as light as my purse on the Monday
morning, the fairest morning of an unfair summer, when the special
whirled me through the sunshine to the sea.

A tender awaited us at Southampton.  Raffles was not on board, nor did
I really look for him till we reached the liner's side.  And then I
looked in vain.  His face was not among the many that fringed the rail;
his hand was not of the few that waved to friends.  I climbed aboard in
a sudden heaviness.  I had no ticket, nor the money to pay for one.  I
did not even know the number of my room.  My heart was in my mouth as I
waylaid a steward and asked if a Mr. Raffles was on board.  Thank
heaven--he was!  But where?  The man did not know, was plainly on some
other errand, and a-hunting I must go.  But there was no sign of him on
the promenade deck, and none below in the saloon; the smoking-room was
empty but for a little German with a red moustache twisted into his
eyes; nor was Raffles in his own cabin, whither I inquired my way in
desperation, but where the sight of his own name on the baggage was
certainly a further reassurance.  Why he himself kept in the
background, however, I could not conceive, and only sinister reasons
would suggest themselves in explanation.

"So there you are!  I've been looking for you all over the ship!"

Despite the graven prohibition, I had tried the bridge as a last
resort; and there, indeed, was A. J. Raffles, seated on a skylight, and
leaning over one of the officers' long chairs, in which reclined a girl
in a white drill coat and skirt--a slip of a girl with a pale skin,
dark hair, and rather remarkable eyes.  So much I noted as he rose and
quickly turned; thereupon I could think of nothing but the swift
grimace which preceded a start of well-feigned astonishment.

"Why--BUNNY?" cried Raffles.  "Where have YOU sprung from?"

I stammered something as he pinched my hand.

"And are you coming in this ship?  And to Naples, too?  Well, upon my
word!  Miss Werner, may I introduce him?"

And he did so without a blush, describing me as an old schoolfellow
whom he had not seen for months, with wilful circumstance and
gratuitous detail that filled me at once with confusion, suspicion, and
revolt.  I felt myself blushing for us both, and I did not care.  My
address utterly deserted me, and I made no effort to recover it, to
carry the thing off.  All I would do was to mumble such words as
Raffles actually put into my mouth, and that I doubt not with a
thoroughly evil grace.

"So you saw my name in the list of passengers and came in search of me?
Good old Bunny; I say, though, I wish you'd share my cabin.  I've got a
beauty on the promenade deck, but they wouldn't promise to keep me by
myself.  We ought to see about it before they shove in some alien.  In
any case we shall have to get out of this."

For a quartermaster had entered the wheelhouse, and even while we had
been speaking the pilot had taken possession of the bridge; as we
descended, the tender left us with flying handkerchiefs and shrill
good-bys; and as we bowed to Miss Werner on the promenade deck, there
came a deep, slow throbbing underfoot, and our voyage had begun.

It did not begin pleasantly between Raffles and me.  On deck he had
overborne my stubborn perplexity by dint of a forced though forceful
joviality; in his cabin the gloves were off.

"You idiot," he snarled, "you've given me away again!"

"How have I given you away?"

I ignored the separate insult in his last word.

"How?  I should have thought any clod could see that I meant us to meet
by chance!"

"After taking both tickets yourself?"

"They knew nothing about that on board; besides, I hadn't decided when
I took the tickets."

"Then you should have let me know when you did decide.  You lay your
plans, and never say a word, and expect me to tumble to them by light
of nature.  How was I to know you had anything on?"

I had turned the tables with some effect.  Raffles almost hung his head.

"The fact is, Bunny, I didn't mean you to know. You--you've grown such
a pious rabbit in your old age!"

My nickname and his tone went far to mollify me, other things went
farther, but I had much to forgive him still.

"If you were afraid of writing," I pursued, "it was your business to
give me the tip the moment I set foot on board.  I would have taken it
all right.  I am not so virtuous as all that."

Was it my imagination, or did Raffles look slightly ashamed?  If so, it
was for the first and last time in all the years I knew him; nor can I
swear to it even now.

"That," said he, "was the very thing I meant to do--to lie in wait in
my room and get you as you passed.  But--"

"You were better engaged?"

"Say otherwise."

"The charming Miss Werner?"

"She is quite charming."

"Most Australian girls are," said I.

"How did you know she was one?" he cried.

"I heard her speak."

"Brute!" said Raffles, laughing; "she has no more twang than you have.
Her people are German, she has been to school in Dresden, and is on her
way out alone."

"Money?" I inquired.

"Confound you!" he said, and, though he was laughing, I thought it was
a point at which the subject might be changed.

"Well," I said, "it wasn't for Miss Werner you wanted us to play
strangers, was it?  You have some deeper game than that, eh?"

"I suppose I have."

"Then hadn't you better tell me what it is?"

Raffles treated me to the old cautious scrutiny that I knew so well;
the very familiarity of it, after all these months, set me smiling in a
way that might have reassured him; for dimly already I divined his
enterprise.

"It won't send you off in the pilot's boat, Bunny?"

"Not quite."

"Then--you remember the pearl you wrote the--"

I did not wait for him to finish his sentence.

"You've got it!" I cried, my face on fire, for I caught sight of it
that moment in the stateroom mirror.

Raffles seemed taken aback.

"Not yet," said he; "but I mean to have it before we get to Naples."

"Is it on board?"

"Yes."

"But how--where--who's got it?"

"A little German officer, a whipper-snapper with perpendicular
mustaches."

"I saw him in the smoke-room."

"That's the chap; he's always there.  Herr Captain Wilhelm von Heumann,
if you look in the list.  Well, he's the special envoy of the emperor,
and he's taking the pearl out with him."

"You found this out in Bremen?"

"No, in Berlin, from a newspaper man I know there.  I'm ashamed to tell
you, Bunny, that I went there on purpose!"

I burst out laughing.

"You needn't be ashamed.  You are doing the very thing I was rather
hoping you were going to propose the other day on the river."

"You were HOPING it?" said Raffles, with his eyes wide open.  Indeed,
it was his turn to show surprise, and mine to be much more ashamed than
I felt.

"Yes," I answered, "I was quite keen on the idea, but I wasn't going to
propose it."

"Yet you would have listened to me the other day?"

Certainly I would, and I told him so without reserve; not brazenly, you
understand; not even now with the gusto of a man who savors such an
adventure for its own sake, but doggedly, defiantly, through my teeth,
as one who had tried to live honestly and failed.  And, while I was
about it, I told him much more.  Eloquently enough, I daresay, I gave
him chapter and verse of my hopeless struggle, my inevitable defeat;
for hopeless and inevitable they were to a man with my record, even
though that record was written only in one's own soul.  It was the old
story of the thief trying to turn honest man; the thing was against
nature, and there was an end of it.

Raffles entirely disagreed with me.  He shook his head over my
conventional view.  Human nature was a board of checkers; why not
reconcile one's self to alternate black and white?  Why desire to be
all one thing or all the other, like our forefathers on the stage or in
the old-fashioned fiction?  For his part, he enjoyed himself on all
squares of the board, and liked the light the better for the shade.  My
conclusion he considered absurd.

"But you err in good company, Bunny, for all the cheap moralists who
preach the same twaddle: old Virgil was the first and worst offender of
you all.  I back myself to climb out of Avernus any day I like, and
sooner or later I shall climb out for good.  I suppose I can't very
well turn myself into a Limited Liability Company.  But I could retire
and settle down and live blamelessly ever after. I'm not sure that it
couldn't be done on this pearl alone!"

"Then you don't still think it too remarkable to sell?"

"We might take a fishery and haul it up with smaller fry.  It would
come after months of ill luck, just as we were going to sell the
schooner; by Jove, it would be the talk of the Pacific!"

"Well, we've got to get it first.  Is this von What's-his-name a
formidable cuss?"

"More so than he looks; and he has the cheek of the devil!"

As he spoke a white drill skirt fluttered past the open state-room
door, and I caught a glimpse of an upturned moustache beyond.

"But is he the chap we have to deal with?  Won't the pearl be in the
purser's keeping?"

Raffles stood at the door, frowning out upon the Solent, but for an
instant he turned to me with a sniff.

"My good fellow, do you suppose the whole ship's company knows there's
a gem like that aboard?  You said that it was worth a hundred thousand
pounds; in Berlin they say it's priceless. I doubt if the skipper
himself knows that von Heumann has it on him."

"And he has?"

"Must have."

"Then we have only him to deal with?"

He answered me without a word.  Something white was fluttering past
once more, and Raffles, stepping forth, made the promenaders three.


II

I do not ask to set foot aboard a finer steamship than the Uhlan of the
Norddeutscher Lloyd, to meet a kindlier gentleman than her commander,
or better fellows than his officers.  This much at least let me have
the grace to admit.  I hated the voyage.  It was no fault of anybody
connected with the ship; it was no fault of the weather, which was
monotonously ideal.  Not even in my own heart did the reason reside;
conscience and I were divorced at last, and the decree made absolute.
With my scruples had fled all fear, and I was ready to revel between
bright skies and sparkling sea with the light-hearted detachment of
Raffles himself.  It was Raffles himself who prevented me, but not
Raffles alone.  It was Raffles and that Colonial minx on her way home
from school.

What he could see in her--but that begs the question.  Of course he saw
no more than I did, but to annoy me, or perhaps to punish me for my
long defection, he must turn his back on me and devote himself to this
chit from Southampton to the Mediterranean.  They were always together.
It was too absurd.  After breakfast they would begin, and go on until
eleven or twelve at night; there was no intervening hour at which you
might not hear her nasal laugh, or his quiet voice talking soft
nonsense into her ear.  Of course it was nonsense!  Is it conceivable
that a man like Raffles, with his knowledge of the world, and his
experience of women (a side of his character upon which I have
purposely never touched, for it deserves another volume); is it
credible, I ask, that such a man could find anything but nonsense to
talk by the day together to a giddy young schoolgirl? I would not be
unfair for the world.

I think I have admitted that the young person had points. Her eyes, I
suppose, were really fine, and certainly the shape of the little brown
face was charming, so far as mere contour can charm.

I admit also more audacity than I cared about, with enviable health,
mettle, and vitality.  I may not have occasion to report any of this
young lady's speeches (they would scarcely bear it), and am therefore
the more anxious to describe her without injustice. I confess to some
little prejudice against her.  I resented her success with Raffles, of
whom, in consequence, I saw less and less each day.  It is a mean thing
to have to confess, but there must have been something not unlike
jealousy rankling within me.

Jealousy there was in another quarter--crude, rampant, undignified
jealousy.  Captain von Heumann would twirl his mustaches into twin
spires, shoot his white cuffs over his rings, and stare at me
insolently through his rimless eyeglasses; we ought to have consoled
each other, but we never exchanged a syllable.  The captain had a
murderous scar across one of his cheeks, a present from Heidelberg, and
I used to think how he must long to have Raffles there to serve the
same.  It was not as though von Heumann never had his innings. Raffles
let him go in several times a day, for the malicious pleasure of
bowling him out as he was "getting set"; those were his words when I
taxed him disingenuously with obnoxious conduct towards a German on a
German boat.

"You'll make yourself disliked on board!"

"By von Heumann merely."

"But is that wise when he's the man we've got to diddle?"

"The wisest thing I ever did.  To have chummed up with him would have
been fatal--the common dodge."

I was consoled, encouraged, almost content.  I had feared Raffles was
neglecting things, and I told him so in a burst.  Here we were near
Gibraltar, and not a word since the Solent.  He shook his head with a
smile.

"Plenty of time, Bunny, plenty of time.  We can do nothing before we
get to Genoa, and that won't be till Sunday night.  The voyage is still
young, and so are we; let's make the most of things while we can."

It was after dinner on the promenade deck, and as Raffles spoke he
glanced sharply fore and aft, leaving me next moment with a step full
of purpose.  I retired to the smoking-room, to smoke and read in a
corner, and to watch von Heumann, who very soon came to drink beer and
to sulk in another.

Few travellers tempt the Red Sea at midsummer; the Uhlan was very empty
indeed.  She had, however, but a limited supply of cabins on the
promenade deck, and there was just that excuse for my sharing Raffles's
room.  I could have had one to myself downstairs, but I must be up
above.  Raffles had insisted that I should insist on the point. So we
were together, I think, without suspicion, though also without any
object that I could see.

On the Sunday afternoon I was asleep in my berth, the lower one, when
the curtains were shaken by Raffles, who was in his shirt-sleeves on
the settee.

"Achilles sulking in his bunk!"

"What else is there to do?" I asked him as I stretched and yawned.  I
noted, however, the good-humor of his tone, and did my best to catch it.

"I have found something else, Bunny."

"I daresay!"

"You misunderstand me.  The whipper-snapper's making his century this
afternoon.  I've had other fish to fry."

I swung my legs over the side of my berth and sat forward, as he was
sitting, all attention.  The inner door, a grating, was shut and
bolted, and curtained like the open porthole.

"We shall be at Genoa before sunset," continued Raffles.  "It's the
place where the deed's got to be done."

"So you still mean to do it?"

"Did I ever say I didn't?"

"You have said so little either way."

"Advisedly so, my dear Bunny; why spoil a pleasure trip by talking
unnecessary shop?  But now the time has come.  It must be done at Genoa
or not at all."

"On land?"

"No, on board, to-morrow night.  To-night would do, but to-morrow is
better, in case of mishap.  If we were forced to use violence we could
get away by the earliest train, and nothing be known till the ship was
sailing and von Heumann found dead or drugged--"

"Not dead!" I exclaimed.

"Of course not," assented Raffles, "or there would be no need for us to
bolt; but if we should have to bolt, Tuesday morning is our time, when
this ship has got to sail, whatever happens.  But I don't anticipate
any violence.  Violence is a confession of terrible incompetence.  In
all these years how many blows have you known me to strike?  Not one, I
believe; but I have been quite ready to kill my man every time, if the
worst came to the worst."

I asked him how he proposed to enter von Heumann's state-room
unobserved, and even through the curtained gloom of ours his face
lighted up.

"Climb into my bunk, Bunny, and you shall see."

I did so, but could see nothing.  Raffles reached across me and tapped
the ventilator, a sort of trapdoor in the wall above his bed, some
eighteen inches long and half that height.  It opened outwards into the
ventilating shaft.

"That," said he, "is our door to fortune.  Open it if you like; you
won't see much, because it doesn't open far; but loosening a couple of
screws will set that all right.  The shaft, as you may see, is more or
less bottomless; you pass under it whenever you go to your bath, and
the top is a skylight on the bridge.  That's why this thing has to be
done while we're at Genoa, because they keep no watch on the bridge in
port.  The ventilator opposite ours is von Heumann's.  It again will
only mean a couple of screws, and there's a beam to stand on while you
work."

"But if anybody should look up from below?"

"It's extremely unlikely that anybody will be astir below, so unlikely
that we can afford to chance it.  No, I can't have you there to make
sure.  The great point is that neither of us should be seen from the
time we turn in.  A couple of ship's boys do sentry-go on these decks,
and they shall be our witnesses; by Jove, it'll be the biggest mystery
that ever was made!"

"If von Heumann doesn't resist."

"Resist!  He won't get the chance.  He drinks too much beer to sleep
light, and nothing is so easy as to chloroform a heavy sleeper; you've
even done it yourself on an occasion of which it's perhaps unfair to
remind you.  Von Heumann will be past sensation almost as soon as I get
my hand through his ventilator.  I shall crawl in over his body, Bunny,
my boy!"

"And I?"

"You will hand me what I want and hold the fort in case of accidents,
and generally lend me the moral support you've made me require.  It's a
luxury, Bunny, but I found it devilish difficult to do without it after
you turned pi!"

He said that Von Heumann was certain to sleep with a bolted door, which
he, of course, would leave unbolted, and spoke of other ways of laying
a false scent while rifling the cabin.  Not that Raffles anticipated a
tiresome search.  The pearl would be about von Heumann's person; in
fact, Raffles knew exactly where and in what he kept it. Naturally I
asked how he could have come by such knowledge, and his answer led up
to a momentary unpleasantness.

"It's a very old story, Bunny.  I really forget in what Book it comes;
I'm only sure of the Testament.  But Samson was the unlucky hero, and
one Delilah the heroine."

And he looked so knowing that I could not be in a moment's doubt as to
his meaning.

"So the fair Australian has been playing Delilah?" said I.

"In a very harmless, innocent sort of way."

"She got his mission out of him?"

"Yes, I've forced him to score all the points he could, and that was
his great stroke, as I hoped it would be.  He has even shown Amy the
pearl."

"Amy, eh! and she promptly told you?"

"Nothing of the kind.  What makes you think so?  I had the greatest
trouble in getting it out of her."

His tone should have been a sufficient warning to me.  I had not the
tact to take it as such.  At last I knew the meaning of his furious
flirtation, and stood wagging my head and shaking my finger, blinded to
his frowns by my own enlightenment.

"Wily worm!" said I.  "Now I see through it all; how dense I've been!"

"Sure you're not still?"

"No; now I understand what has beaten me all the week.  I simply
couldn't fathom what you saw in that little girl.  I never dreamt it
was part of the game."

"So you think it was that and nothing more?"

"You deep old dog--of course I do!"

"You didn't know she was the daughter of a wealthy squatter?"

"There are wealthy women by the dozen who would marry you to-morrow."

"It doesn't occur to you that I might like to draw stumps, start clean,
and live happily ever after--in the bush?"

"With that voice?  It certainly does not!"

"Bunny!" he cried, so fiercely that I braced myself for a blow.

But no more followed.

"Do you think you would live happily?" I made bold to ask him.

"God knows!" he answered.  And with that he left me, to marvel at his
look and tone, and, more than ever, at the insufficiently exciting
cause.


III

Of all the mere feats of cracksmanship which I have seen Raffles
perform, at once the most delicate and most difficult was that which he
accomplished between one and two o'clock on the Tuesday morning, aboard
the North German steamer Uhlan, lying at anchor in Genoa harbor.

Not a hitch occurred.  Everything had been foreseen; everything
happened as I had been assured everything must.  Nobody was about
below, only the ship's boys on deck, and nobody on the bridge.  It was
twenty-five minutes past one when Raffles, without a stitch of clothing
on his body, but with a glass phial, corked with cotton-wool, between
his teeth, and a tiny screw-driver behind his ear, squirmed feet first
through the ventilator over his berth; and it was nineteen minutes to
two when he returned, head first, with the phial still between his
teeth, and the cotton-wool rammed home to still the rattling of that
which lay like a great gray bean within.  He had taken screws out and
put them in again; he had unfastened von Heumann's ventilator and had
left it fast as he had found it--fast as he instantly proceeded to make
his own.  As for von Heumann, it had been enough to place the drenched
wad first on his mustache, and then to hold it between his gaping lips;
thereafter the intruder had climbed both ways across his shins without
eliciting a groan.

And here was the prize--this pearl as large as a filbert--with a pale
pink tinge like a lady's fingernail--this spoil of a filibustering
age--this gift from a European emperor to a South Sea chief. We gloated
over it when all was snug.  We toasted it in whiskey and soda-water
laid in overnight in view of the great moment.  But the moment was
greater, more triumphant, than our most sanguine dreams.  All we had
now to do was to secrete the gem (which Raffles had prised from its
setting, replacing the latter), so that we could stand the strictest
search and yet take it ashore with us at Naples; and this Raffles was
doing when I turned in.  I myself would have landed incontinently, that
night, at Genoa and bolted with the spoil; he would not hear of it, for
a dozen good reasons which will be obvious.

On the whole I do not think that anything was discovered or suspected
before we weighed anchor; but I cannot be sure.  It is difficult to
believe that a man could be chloroformed in his sleep and feel no
tell-tale effects, sniff no suspicious odor, in the morning.
Nevertheless, von Heumann reappeared as though nothing had happened to
him, his German cap over his eyes and his mustaches brushing the peak.
And by ten o'clock we were quit of Genoa; the last lean, blue-chinned
official had left our decks; the last fruitseller had been beaten off
with bucketsful of water and left cursing us from his boat; the last
passenger had come aboard at the last moment--a fussy graybeard who
kept the big ship waiting while he haggled with his boatman over half a
lira.  But at length we were off, the tug was shed, the lighthouse
passed, and Raffles and I leaned together over the rail, watching our
shadows on the pale green, liquid, veined marble that again washed the
vessel's side.

Von Heumann was having his innings once more; it was part of the design
that he should remain in all day, and so postpone the inevitable hour;
and, though the lady looked bored, and was for ever glancing in our
direction, he seemed only too willing to avail himself of his
opportunities. But Raffles was moody and ill-at-ease.  He had not the
air of a successful man.  I could but opine that the impending parting
at Naples sat heavily on his spirit.

He would neither talk to me, nor would he let me go.

"Stop where you are, Bunny.  I've things to tell you.  Can you swim?"

"A bit."

"Ten miles?"

"Ten?" I burst out laughing.  "Not one!  Why do you ask?"

"We shall be within a ten miles' swim of the shore most of the day."

"What on earth are you driving at, Raffles?"

"Nothing; only I shall swim for it if the worst comes to the worst.  I
suppose you can't swim under water at all?"

I did not answer his question.  I scarcely heard it: cold beads were
bursting through my skin.

"Why should the worst come to the worst?" I whispered.  "We aren't
found out, are we?"

"No."

"Then why speak as though we were?"

"We may be; an old enemy of ours is on board."

"An old enemy?"

"Mackenzie."

"Never!"

"The man with the beard who came aboard last."

"Are you sure?"

"Sure!  I was only sorry to see you didn't recognize him too."

I took my handkerchief to my face; now that I thought of it, there had
been something familiar in the old man's gait, as well as something
rather youthful for his apparent years; his very beard seemed
unconvincing, now that I recalled it in the light of this horrible
revelation.  I looked up and down the deck, but the old man was nowhere
to be seen.

"That's the worst of it," said Raffles.  "I saw him go into the
captain's cabin twenty minutes ago."

"But what can have brought him?" I cried miserably.  "Can it be a
coincidence--is it somebody else he's after?"

Raffles shook his head.

"Hardly this time."

"Then you think he's after you?"

"I've been afraid of it for some weeks."

"Yet there you stand!"

"What am I to do?  I don't want to swim for it before I must.  I begin
to wish I'd taken your advice, Bunny, and left the ship at Genoa.  But
I've not the smallest doubt that Mac was watching both ship and station
till the last moment.  That's why he ran it so fine."

He took a cigarette and handed me the case, but I shook my head
impatiently.

"I still don't understand," said I.  "Why should he be after you?  He
couldn't come all this way about a jewel which was perfectly safe for
all he knew.  What's your own theory?"

"Simply that he's been on my track for some time, probably ever since
friend Crawshay slipped clean through his fingers last November.  There
have been other indications.  I am really not unprepared for this.  But
it can only be pure suspicion.  I'll defy him to bring anything home,
and I'll defy him to find the pearl!  Theory, my dear Bunny?  I know
how he's got here as well as though I'd been inside that Scotchman's
skin, and I know what he'll do next.  He found out I'd gone abroad, and
looked for a motive; he found out about von Heumann and his mission,
and there was his motive cut-and-dried.  Great chance--to nab me on a
new job altogether.  But he won't do it, Bunny; mark my words, he'll
search the ship and search us all, when the loss is known; but he'll
search in vain.  And there's the skipper beckoning the whippersnapper
to his cabin: the fat will be in the fire in five minutes!"

Yet there was no conflagration, no fuss, no searching of the
passengers, no whisper of what had happened in the air; instead of a
stir there was portentous peace; and it was clear to me that Raffles
was not a little disturbed at the falsification of all his predictions.
There was something sinister in silence under such a loss, and the
silence was sustained for hours during which Mackenzie never
reappeared.  But he was abroad during the luncheon-hour--he was in our
cabin!  I had left my book in Raffles's berth, and in taking it after
lunch I touched the quilt.  It was warm from the recent pressure of
flesh and blood, and on an instinct I sprang to the ventilator; as I
opened it the ventilator opposite was closed with a snap.

I waylaid Raffles.  "All right!  Let him find the pearl."

"Have you dumped it overboard?"

"That's a question I shan't condescend to answer."

He turned on his heel, and at subsequent intervals I saw him making the
most of his last afternoon with the inevitable Miss Werner.  I remember
that she looked both cool and smart in quite a simple affair of brown
holland, which toned well with her complexion, and was cleverly
relieved with touches of scarlet.  I quite admired her that afternoon,
for her eyes were really very good, and so were her teeth, yet I had
never admired her more directly in my own despite.  For I passed them
again and again in order to get a word with Raffles, to tell him I knew
there was danger in the wind; but he would not so much as catch my eye.
So at last I gave it up.  And I saw him next in the captain's cabin.

They had summoned him first; he had gone in smiling; and smiling I
found him when they summoned me.  The state-room was spacious, as
befitted that of a commander.  Mackenzie sat on the settee, his beard
in front of him on the polished table; but a revolver lay in front of
the captain; and, when I had entered, the chief officer, who had
summoned me, shut the door and put his back to it. Von Heumann
completed the party, his fingers busy with his mustache.

Raffles greeted me.

"This is a great joke!" he cried.  "You remember the pearl you were so
keen about, Bunny, the emperor's pearl, the pearl money wouldn't buy?
It seems it was entrusted to our little friend here, to take out to
Canoodle Dum, and the poor little chap's gone and lost it; ergo, as
we're Britishers, they think we've got it!"

"But I know ye have," put in Mackenzie, nodding to his beard.

"You will recognize that loyal and patriotic voice," said Raffles.
"Mon, 'tis our auld acquaintance Mackenzie, o' Scoteland Yarrd an'
Scoteland itsel'!"

"Dat is enough," cried the captain.  "Have you submid to be searge, or
do I vorce you?"

"What you will," said Raffles, "but it will do you no harm to give us
fair play first.  You accuse us of breaking into Captain von Heumann's
state-room during the small hours of this morning, and abstracting from
it this confounded pearl.  Well, I can prove that I was in my own room
all night long, and I have no doubt my friend can prove the same."

"Most certainly I can," said I indignantly. "The ship's boys can bear
witness to that."

Mackenzie laughed, and shook his head at his reflection in the polished
mahogany.

"That was ver clever," said he, "and like enough it would ha' served ye
had I not stepped aboard.  But I've just had a look at they
ventilators, and I think I know how ye worrked it.  Anyway, captain, it
makes no matter.  I'll just be clappin' the derbies on these young
sparks, an' then--"

"By what right?" roared Raffles, in a ringing voice, and I never saw
his face in such a blaze. "Search us if you like; search every scrap
and stitch we possess; but you dare to lay a finger on us without a
warrant!"

"I wouldna' dare," said Mackenzie, as he fumbled in his breast pocket,
and Raffles dived his hand into his own.  "Haud his wrist!" shouted the
Scotchman; and the huge Colt that had been with us many a night, but
had never been fired in my hearing, clattered on the table and was
raked in by the captain.

"All right," said Raffles savagely to the mate. "You can let go now.  I
won't try it again.  Now, Mackenzie, let's see your warrant!"

"Ye'll no mishandle it?"

"What good would that do me?  Let me see it," said Raffles,
peremptorily, and the detective obeyed.  Raffles raised his eyebrows as
he perused the document; his mouth hardened, but suddenly relaxed; and
it was with a smile and a shrug that he returned the paper.

"Wull that do for ye?" inquired Mackenzie.

"It may.  I congratulate you, Mackenzie; it's a strong hand, at any
rate.  Two burglaries and the Melrose necklace, Bunny!"  And he turned
to me with a rueful smile.

"An' all easy to prove," said the Scotchman, pocketing the warrant.
"I've one o' these for you," he added, nodding to me, "only not such a
long one."

"To think," said the captain reproachfully, "that my shib should be
made a den of thiefs!  It shall be a very disagreeable madder, I have
been obliged to pud you both in irons until we get to Nables."

"Surely not!" exclaimed Raffles.  "Mackenzie, intercede with him; don't
give your countrymen away before all hands!  Captain, we can't escape;
surely you could hush it up for the night?  Look here, here's
everything I have in my pockets; you empty yours, too, Bunny, and they
shall strip us stark if they suspect we've weapons up our sleeves. All
I ask is that we are allowed to get out of this without gyves upon our
wrists!"

"Webbons you may not have," said the captain; "but wad aboud der bearl
dat you were sdealing?"

"You shall have it!" cried Raffles.  "You shall have it this minute if
you guarantee no public indignity on board!"

"That I'll see to," said Mackenzie, "as long as you behave yourselves.
There now, where is't?"

"On the table under your nose."

My eyes fell with the rest, but no pearl was there; only the contents
of our pockets--our watches, pocket-books, pencils, penknives,
cigarette cases--lay on the shiny table along with the revolvers
already mentioned.

"Ye're humbuggin' us," said Mackenzie. "What's the use?"

"I'm doing nothing of the sort," laughed Raffles.  "I'm testing you.
Where's the harm?"

"It's here, joke apart?"

"On that table, by all my gods."

Mackenzie opened the cigarette cases and shook each particular
cigarette.  Thereupon Raffles prayed to be allowed to smoke one, and,
when his prayer was heard, observed that the pearl had been on the
table much longer than the cigarettes.  Mackenzie promptly caught up
the Colt and opened the chamber in the butt.

"Not there, not there," said Raffles; "but you're getting hot.  Try the
cartridges."

Mackenzie emptied them into his palm, and shook each one at his ear
without result.

"Oh, give them to me!"

And, in an instant, Raffles had found the right one, had bitten out the
bullet, and placed the emperor's pearl with a flourish in the centre of
the table.

"After that you will perhaps show me such little consideration as is in
your power.  Captain, I have been a bit of a villain, as you see, and
as such I am ready and willing to lie in irons all night if you deem it
requisite for the safety of the ship.  All I ask is that you do me one
favor first."

"That shall debend on wad der vafour has been."

"Captain, I've done a worse thing aboard your ship than any of you
know.  I have become engaged to be married, and I want to say good-by!"

I suppose we were all equally amazed; but the only one to express his
amazement was von Heumann, whose deep-chested German oath was almost
his first contribution to the proceedings.  He was not slow to follow
it, however, with a vigorous protest against the proposed farewell; but
he was overruled, and the masterful prisoner had his way. He was to
have five minutes with the girl, while the captain and Mackenzie stood
within range (but not earshot), with their revolvers behind their
backs.  As we were moving from the cabin, in a body, he stopped and
gripped my hand.

"So I 've let you in at last, Bunny--at last and after all!  If you
knew how sorry I am.... But you won't get much--I don't see why you
should get anything at all.  Can you forgive me? This may be for years,
and it may be for ever, you know!  You were a good pal always when it
came to the scratch; some day or other you mayn't be so sorry to
remember you were a good pal at the last!"

There was a meaning in his eye that I understood; and my teeth were
set, and my nerve strung ready, as I wrung that strong and cunning hand
for the last time in my life.

How that last scene stays with me, and will stay to my death!  How I
see every detail, every shadow on the sunlit deck!  We were among the
islands that dot the course from Genoa to Naples; that was Elba falling
back on our starboard quarter, that purple patch with the hot sun
setting over it.  The captain's cabin opened to starboard, and the
starboard promenade deck, sheeted with sunshine and scored with shadow,
was deserted, but for the group of which I was one, and for the pale,
slim, brown figure further aft with Raffles.  Engaged?  I could not
believe it, cannot to this day. Yet there they stood together, and we
did not hear a word; there they stood out against the sunset, and the
long, dazzling highway of sunlit sea that sparkled from Elba to the
Uhlan's plates; and their shadows reached almost to our feet.

Suddenly--an instant--and the thing was done--a thing I have never
known whether to admire or to detest.  He caught her--he kissed her
before us all--then flung her from him so that she almost fell.  It was
that action which foretold the next. The mate sprang after him, and I
sprang after the mate.

Raffles was on the rail, but only just.

"Hold him, Bunny!" he cried.  "Hold him tight!"

And, as I obeyed that last behest with all my might, without a thought
of what I was doing, save that he bade me do it, I saw his hands shoot
up and his head bob down, and his lithe, spare body cut the sunset as
cleanly and precisely as though he had plunged at his leisure from a
diver's board!

     *       *       *       *       *

Of what followed on deck I can tell you nothing, for I was not there.
Nor can my final punishment, my long imprisonment, my everlasting
disgrace, concern or profit you, beyond the interest and advantage to
be gleaned from the knowledge that I at least had my deserts.  But one
thing I must set down, believe it who will--one more thing only and I
am done.

It was into a second-class cabin, on the starboard side, that I was
promptly thrust in irons, and the door locked upon me as though I were
another Raffles.  Meanwhile a boat was lowered, and the sea scoured to
no purpose, as is doubtless on record elsewhere.  But either the
setting sun, flashing over the waves, must have blinded all eyes, or
else mine were victims of a strange illusion.

For the boat was back, the screw throbbing, and the prisoner peering
through his porthole across the sunlit waters that he believed had
closed for ever over his comrade's head.  Suddenly the sun sank behind
the Island of Elba, the lane of dancing sunlight was instantaneously
quenched and swallowed in the trackless waste, and in the middle
distance, already miles astern, either my sight deceived me or a black
speck bobbed amid the gray. The bugle had blown for dinner: it may well
be that all save myself had ceased to strain an eye. And now I lost
what I had found, now it rose, now sank, and now I gave it up utterly.
Yet anon it would rise again, a mere mote dancing in the dim gray
distance, drifting towards a purple island, beneath a fading western
sky, streaked with dead gold and cerise.  And night fell before I knew
whether it was a human head or not.





I

THE EPISODE OF THE MEXICAN SEER


My name is Seymour Wilbraham Wentworth. I am brother-in-law and
secretary to Sir Charles Vandrift, the South African millionaire and
famous financier. Many years ago, when Charlie Vandrift was a small
lawyer in Cape Town, I had the (qualified) good fortune to marry his
sister. Much later, when the Vandrift estate and farm near Kimberley
developed by degrees into the Cloetedorp Golcondas, Limited, my
brother-in-law offered me the not unremunerative post of secretary;
in which capacity I have ever since been his constant and attached
companion.

He is not a man whom any common sharper can take in, is Charles
Vandrift. Middle height, square build, firm mouth, keen eyes--the
very picture of a sharp and successful business genius. I have only
known one rogue impose upon Sir Charles, and that one rogue, as the
Commissary of Police at Nice remarked, would doubtless have imposed
upon a syndicate of Vidocq, Robert Houdin, and Cagliostro.

We had run across to the Riviera for a few weeks in the season. Our
object being strictly rest and recreation from the arduous duties
of financial combination, we did not think it necessary to take our
wives out with us. Indeed, Lady Vandrift is absolutely wedded to the
joys of London, and does not appreciate the rural delights of the
Mediterranean littoral. But Sir Charles and I, though immersed in
affairs when at home, both thoroughly enjoy the complete change from
the City to the charming vegetation and pellucid air on the terrace
at Monte Carlo. We _are_ so fond of scenery. That delicious view
over the rocks of Monaco, with the Maritime Alps in the rear, and
the blue sea in front, not to mention the imposing Casino in the
foreground, appeals to me as one of the most beautiful prospects in
all Europe. Sir Charles has a sentimental attachment for the place.
He finds it restores and freshens him, after the turmoil of London,
to win a few hundreds at roulette in the course of an afternoon
among the palms and cactuses and pure breezes of Monte Carlo. The
country, say I, for a jaded intellect! However, we never on any
account actually stop in the Principality itself. Sir Charles thinks
Monte Carlo is not a sound address for a financier's letters. He
prefers a comfortable hotel on the Promenade des Anglais at Nice,
where he recovers health and renovates his nervous system by taking
daily excursions along the coast to the Casino.

This particular season we were snugly ensconced at the Hôtel des
Anglais. We had capital quarters on the first floor--salon, study,
and bedrooms--and found on the spot a most agreeable cosmopolitan
society. All Nice, just then, was ringing with talk about a curious
impostor, known to his followers as the Great Mexican Seer, and
supposed to be gifted with second sight, as well as with endless
other supernatural powers. Now, it is a peculiarity of my able
brother-in-law's that, when he meets with a quack, he burns to
expose him; he is so keen a man of business himself that it gives
him, so to speak, a disinterested pleasure to unmask and detect
imposture in others. Many ladies at the hotel, some of whom had met
and conversed with the Mexican Seer, were constantly telling us
strange stories of his doings. He had disclosed to one the present
whereabouts of a runaway husband; he had pointed out to another the
numbers that would win at roulette next evening; he had shown a
third the image on a screen of the man she had for years adored
without his knowledge. Of course, Sir Charles didn't believe a word
of it; but his curiosity was roused; he wished to see and judge for
himself of the wonderful thought-reader.

What would be his terms, do you think, for a private séance he
asked of Madame Picardet, the lady to whom the Seer had successfully
predicted the winning numbers.

He does not work for money, Madame Picardet answered, but for
the good of humanity. I'm sure he would gladly come and exhibit for
nothing his miraculous faculties.

Nonsense! Sir Charles answered. The man must live. I'd pay him
five guineas, though, to see him alone. What hotel is he stopping at

The Cosmopolitan, I think, the lady answered. Oh no; I remember
now, the Westminster.

Sir Charles turned to me quietly. Look here, Seymour, he
whispered. Go round to this fellow's place immediately after
dinner, and offer him five pounds to give a private séance at once
in my rooms, without mentioning who I am to him; keep the name quite
quiet. Bring him back with you, too, and come straight upstairs
with him, so that there may be no collusion. We'll see just how much
the fellow can tell us.

I went as directed. I found the Seer a very remarkable and
interesting person. He stood about Sir Charles's own height, but was
slimmer and straighter, with an aquiline nose, strangely piercing
eyes, very large black pupils, and a finely-chiselled close-shaven
face, like the bust of Antinous in our hall in Mayfair. What gave him
his most characteristic touch, however, was his odd head of hair,
curly and wavy like Paderewski's, standing out in a halo round his
high white forehead and his delicate profile. I could see at a
glance why he succeeded so well in impressing women; he had the
look of a poet, a singer, a prophet.

I have come round, I said, to ask whether you will consent to
give a séance at once in a friend's rooms; and my principal wishes
me to add that he is prepared to pay five pounds as the price of the
entertainment.

Señor Antonio Herrera--that was what he called himself--bowed to
me with impressive Spanish politeness. His dusky olive cheeks were
wrinkled with a smile of gentle contempt as he answered gravely--

I do not sell my gifts; I bestow them freely. If your friend--your
anonymous friend--desires to behold the cosmic wonders that are
wrought through my hands, I am glad to show them to him.
Fortunately, as often happens when it is necessary to convince
and confound a sceptic (for that your friend is a sceptic I feel
instinctively), I chance to have no engagements at all this
evening. He ran his hand through his fine, long hair reflectively.
Yes, I go, he continued, as if addressing some unknown presence
that hovered about the ceiling; I go; come with me! Then he put on
his broad sombrero, with its crimson ribbon, wrapped a cloak round
his shoulders, lighted a cigarette, and strode forth by my side
towards the Hôtel des Anglais.

He talked little by the way, and that little in curt sentences. He
seemed buried in deep thought; indeed, when we reached the door and
I turned in, he walked a step or two farther on, as if not noticing
to what place I had brought him. Then he drew himself up short, and
gazed around him for a moment. Ha, the Anglais, he said--and I may
mention in passing that his English, in spite of a slight southern
accent, was idiomatic and excellent. It is here, then; it is here!
He was addressing once more the unseen presence.

I smiled to think that these childish devices were intended to
deceive Sir Charles Vandrift. Not quite the sort of man (as the City
of London knows) to be taken in by hocus-pocus. And all this, I saw,
was the cheapest and most commonplace conjurer's patter.

We went upstairs to our rooms. Charles had gathered together a
few friends to watch the performance. The Seer entered, wrapt in
thought. He was in evening dress, but a red sash round his waist
gave a touch of picturesqueness and a dash of colour. He paused for
a moment in the middle of the salon, without letting his eyes rest
on anybody or anything. Then he walked straight up to Charles, and
held out his dark hand.

Good-evening, he said. You are the host. My soul's sight tells
me so.

Good shot, Sir Charles answered. These fellows have to be
quick-witted, you know, Mrs. Mackenzie, or they'd never get on
at it.

The Seer gazed about him, and smiled blankly at a person or two
whose faces he seemed to recognise from a previous existence. Then
Charles began to ask him a few simple questions, not about himself,
but about me, just to test him. He answered most of them with
surprising correctness. His name His name begins with an S I
think--You call him Seymour. He paused long between each clause, as
if the facts were revealed to him slowly. Seymour--Wilbraham--Earl
of Strafford. No, not Earl of Strafford! Seymour Wilbraham
Wentworth. There seems to be some connection in somebody's mind now
present between Wentworth and Strafford. I am not English. I do not
know what it means. But they are somehow the same name, Wentworth
and Strafford.

He gazed around, apparently for confirmation. A lady came to his
rescue.

Wentworth was the surname of the great Earl of Strafford, she
murmured gently; and I was wondering, as you spoke, whether
Mr. Wentworth might possibly be descended from him.

He is, the Seer replied instantly, with a flash of those dark
eyes. And I thought this curious; for though my father always
maintained the reality of the relationship, there was one link
wanting to complete the pedigree. He could not make sure that
the Hon. Thomas Wilbraham Wentworth was the father of Jonathan
Wentworth, the Bristol horse-dealer, from whom we are descended.

Where was I born Sir Charles interrupted, coming suddenly to his
own case.

The Seer clapped his two hands to his forehead and held it between
them, as if to prevent it from bursting. Africa, he said slowly,
as the facts narrowed down, so to speak. South Africa; Cape of Good
Hope; Jansenville; De Witt Street. 1840.

By Jove, he's correct, Sir Charles muttered. He seems really to
do it. Still, he may have found me out. He may have known where he
was coming.

I never gave a hint, I answered; till he reached the door, he
didn't even know to what hotel I was piloting him.

The Seer stroked his chin softly. His eye appeared to me to have a
furtive gleam in it. Would you like me to tell you the number of
a bank-note inclosed in an envelope he asked casually.

Go out of the room, Sir Charles said, while I pass it round the
company.

Señor Herrera disappeared. Sir Charles passed it round cautiously,
holding it all the time in his own hand, but letting his guests see
the number. Then he placed it in an envelope and gummed it down
firmly.

The Seer returned. His keen eyes swept the company with a
comprehensive glance. He shook his shaggy mane. Then he took
the envelope in his hands and gazed at it fixedly. AF, 73549,
he answered, in a slow tone. A Bank of England note for fifty
pounds--exchanged at the Casino for gold won yesterday at
Monte Carlo.

I see how he did that, Sir Charles said triumphantly. He must
have changed it there himself; and then I changed it back again.
In point of fact, I remember seeing a fellow with long hair loafing
about. Still, it's capital conjuring.

He can see through matter, one of the ladies interposed. It was
Madame Picardet. He can see through a box. She drew a little gold
vinaigrette, such as our grandmothers used, from her dress-pocket.
What is in this she inquired, holding it up to him.

Señor Herrera gazed through it. Three gold coins, he replied,
knitting his brows with the effort of seeing into the box one,
an American five dollars; one, a French ten-franc piece; one,
twenty marks, German, of the old Emperor William.

She opened the box and passed it round. Sir Charles smiled a quiet
smile.

Confederacy! he muttered, half to himself. Confederacy!

The Seer turned to him with a sullen air. You want a better sign
he said, in a very impressive voice. A sign that will convince you!
Very well you have a letter in your left waistcoat pocket--a
crumpled-up letter. Do you wish me to read it out I will, if you
desire it.

It may seem to those who know Sir Charles incredible, but, I am
bound to admit, my brother-in-law coloured. What that letter
contained I cannot say; he only answered, very testily and
evasively, No, thank you; I won't trouble you. The exhibition you
have already given us of your skill in this kind more than amply
suffices. And his fingers strayed nervously to his waistcoat
pocket, as if he was half afraid, even then, Señor Herrera would
read it.

I fancied, too, he glanced somewhat anxiously towards Madame
Picardet.

The Seer bowed courteously. Your will, señor, is law, he said. I
make it a principle, though I can see through all things, invariably
to respect the secrecies and sanctities. If it were not so, I might
dissolve society. For which of us is there who could bear the whole
truth being told about him He gazed around the room. An unpleasant
thrill supervened. Most of us felt this uncanny Spanish American
knew really too much. And some of us were engaged in financial
operations.

For example, the Seer continued blandly, I happened a few weeks
ago to travel down here from Paris by train with a very intelligent
man, a company promoter. He had in his bag some documents--some
confidential documents he glanced at Sir Charles. You know the
kind of thing, my dear sir reports from experts--from mining
engineers. You may have seen some such; marked _strictly private_.

They form an element in high finance, Sir Charles admitted coldly.

Pre-cisely, the Seer murmured, his accent for a moment less
Spanish than before. And, as they were marked _strictly private_,
I respect, of course, the seal of confidence. That's all I wish to
say. I hold it a duty, being intrusted with such powers, not to use
them in a manner which may annoy or incommode my fellow-creatures.

Your feeling does you honour, Sir Charles answered, with some
acerbity. Then he whispered in my ear Confounded clever scoundrel,
Sey; rather wish we hadn't brought him here.

Señor Herrera seemed intuitively to divine this wish, for he
interposed, in a lighter and gayer tone--

I will now show you a different and more interesting embodiment
of occult power, for which we shall need a somewhat subdued
arrangement of surrounding lights. Would you mind, señor host--for
I have purposely abstained from reading your name on the brain of
any one present--would you mind my turning down this lamp just a
little ... So! That will do. Now, this one; and this one. Exactly!
that's right. He poured a few grains of powder out of a packet into
a saucer. Next, a match, if you please. Thank you! It burnt with a
strange green light. He drew from his pocket a card, and produced a
little ink-bottle. Have you a pen he asked.

I instantly brought one. He handed it to Sir Charles. Oblige me,
he said, by writing your name there. And he indicated a place in
the centre of the card, which had an embossed edge, with a small
middle square of a different colour.

Sir Charles has a natural disinclination to signing his name without
knowing why. What do you want with it he asked. (A millionaire's
signature has so many uses.)

I want you to put the card in an envelope, the Seer replied, and
then to burn it. After that, I shall show you your own name written
in letters of blood on my arm, in your own handwriting.

Sir Charles took the pen. If the signature was to be burned as soon
as finished, he didn't mind giving it. He wrote his name in his
usual firm clear style--the writing of a man who knows his worth
and is not afraid of drawing a cheque for five thousand.

Look at it long, the Seer said, from the other side of the room.
He had not watched him write it.

Sir Charles stared at it fixedly. The Seer was really beginning to
produce an impression.

Now, put it in that envelope, the Seer exclaimed.

Sir Charles, like a lamb, placed it as directed.

The Seer strode forward. Give me the envelope, he said. He took it
in his hand, walked over towards the fireplace, and solemnly burnt
it. See--it crumbles into ashes, he cried. Then he came back to
the middle of the room, close to the green light, rolled up his
sleeve, and held his arm before Sir Charles. There, in blood-red
letters, my brother-in-law read the name, Charles Vandrift, in
his own handwriting!

I see how that's done, Sir Charles murmured, drawing back. It's
a clever delusion; but still, I see through it. It's like that
ghost-book. Your ink was deep green; your light was green; you made
me look at it long; and then I saw the same thing written on the
skin of your arm in complementary colours.

You think so the Seer replied, with a curious curl of the lip.

I'm sure of it, Sir Charles answered.

Quick as lightning the Seer again rolled up his sleeve. That's
your name, he cried, in a very clear voice, but not your whole
name. What do you say, then, to my right Is this one also a
complementary colour He held his other arm out. There, in
sea-green letters, I read the name, Charles O'Sullivan Vandrift.
It is my brother-in-law's full baptismal designation; but he has
dropped the O'Sullivan for many years past, and, to say the truth,
doesn't like it. He is a little bit ashamed of his mother's family.

Charles glanced at it hurriedly. Quite right, he said, quite
right! But his voice was hollow. I could guess he didn't care to
continue the séance. He could see through the man, of course; but it
was clear the fellow knew too much about us to be entirely pleasant.

Turn up the lights, I said, and a servant turned them. Shall I
say coffee and benedictine I whispered to Vandrift.

By all means, he answered. Anything to keep this fellow from
further impertinences! And, I say, don't you think you'd better
suggest at the same time that the men should smoke Even these
ladies are not above a cigarette--some of them.

There was a sigh of relief. The lights burned brightly. The Seer for
the moment retired from business, so to speak. He accepted a partaga
with a very good grace, sipped his coffee in a corner, and chatted
to the lady who had suggested Strafford with marked politeness. He
was a polished gentleman.

Next morning, in the hall of the hotel, I saw Madame Picardet again,
in a neat tailor-made travelling dress, evidently bound for the
railway-station.

What, off, Madame Picardet I cried.

She smiled, and held out her prettily-gloved hand. Yes, I'm off,
she answered archly. Florence, or Rome, or somewhere. I've drained
Nice dry--like a sucked orange. Got all the fun I can out of it.
Now I'm away again to my beloved Italy.

But it struck me as odd that, if Italy was her game, she went by the
omnibus which takes down to the train de luxe for Paris. However,
a man of the world accepts what a lady tells him, no matter how
improbable; and I confess, for ten days or so, I thought no more
about her, or the Seer either.

At the end of that time our fortnightly pass-book came in from
the bank in London. It is part of my duty, as the millionaire's
secretary, to make up this book once a fortnight, and to compare
the cancelled cheques with Sir Charles's counterfoils. On this
particular occasion I happened to observe what I can only describe
as a very grave discrepancy,--in fact, a discrepancy of 5000 pounds.
On the wrong side, too. Sir Charles was debited with 5000 pounds
more than the total amount that was shown on the counterfoils.

I examined the book with care. The source of the error was obvious.
It lay in a cheque to Self or Bearer, for 5000 pounds, signed by Sir
Charles, and evidently paid across the counter in London, as it bore
on its face no stamp or indication of any other office.

I called in my brother-in-law from the salon to the study. Look
here, Charles, I said, there's a cheque in the book which you
haven't entered. And I handed it to him without comment, for I
thought it might have been drawn to settle some little loss on the
turf or at cards, or to make up some other affair he didn't desire
to mention to me. These things will happen.

He looked at it and stared hard. Then he pursed up his mouth and
gave a long low Whew! At last he turned it over and remarked,
I say, Sey, my boy, we've just been done jolly well brown,
haven't we

I glanced at the cheque. How do you mean I inquired.

Why, the Seer, he replied, still staring at it ruefully. I
don't mind the five thou., but to think the fellow should have
gammoned the pair of us like that--ignominious, I call it!

How do you know it's the Seer I asked.

Look at the green ink, he answered. Besides, I recollect the
very shape of the last flourish. I flourished a bit like that in
the excitement of the moment, which I don't always do with my
regular signature.

He's done us, I answered, recognising it. But how the dickens
did he manage to transfer it to the cheque This looks like your
own handwriting, Charles, not a clever forgery.

It is, he said. I admit it--I can't deny it. Only fancy his
bamboozling me when I was most on my guard! I wasn't to be taken
in by any of his silly occult tricks and catch-words; but it never
occurred to me he was going to victimise me financially in this
way. I expected attempts at a loan or an extortion; but to collar
my signature to a blank cheque--atrocious!

How did he manage it I asked.

I haven't the faintest conception. I only know those are the
words I wrote. I could swear to them anywhere.

Then you can't protest the cheque

Unfortunately, no; it's my own true signature.

We went that afternoon without delay to see the Chief Commissary
of Police at the office. He was a gentlemanly Frenchman, much less
formal and red-tapey than usual, and he spoke excellent English
with an American accent, having acted, in fact, as a detective in
New York for about ten years in his early manhood.

I guess, he said slowly, after hearing our story, you've been
victimised right here by Colonel Clay, gentlemen.

Who is Colonel Clay Sir Charles asked.

That's just what I want to know, the Commissary answered, in
his curious American-French-English. He is a Colonel, because he
occasionally gives himself a commission; he is called Colonel Clay,
because he appears to possess an india-rubber face, and he can
mould it like clay in the hands of the potter. Real name, unknown.
Nationality, equally French and English. Address, usually Europe.
Profession, former maker of wax figures to the Museé Grévin. Age,
what he chooses. Employs his knowledge to mould his own nose
and cheeks, with wax additions, to the character he desires to
personate. Aquiline this time, you say. Hein! Anything like these
photographs

He rummaged in his desk and handed us two.

Not in the least, Sir Charles answered. Except, perhaps, as to the
neck, everything here is quite unlike him.

Then that's the Colonel! the Commissary answered, with decision,
rubbing his hands in glee. Look here, and he took out a pencil
and rapidly sketched the outline of one of the two faces--that of
a bland-looking young man, with no expression worth mentioning.
There's the Colonel in his simple disguise. Very good. Now watch
me figure to yourself that he adds here a tiny patch of wax to his
nose--an aquiline bridge--just so; well, you have him right there;
and the chin, ah, one touch now, for hair, a wig for complexion,
nothing easier that's the profile of your rascal, isn't it

Exactly, we both murmured. By two curves of the pencil, and a
shock of false hair, the face was transmuted.

He had very large eyes, with very big pupils, though, I objected,
looking close; and the man in the photograph here has them small
and boiled-fishy.

That's so, the Commissary answered. A drop of belladonna
expands--and produces the Seer; five grains of opium contract--and
give a dead-alive, stupidly-innocent appearance. Well, you leave
this affair to me, gentlemen. I'll see the fun out. I don't say I'll
catch him for you; nobody ever yet has caught Colonel Clay; but
I'll explain how he did the trick; and that ought to be consolation
enough to a man of your means for a trifle of five thousand!

You are not the conventional French office-holder, M. le
Commissaire, I ventured to interpose.

You bet! the Commissary replied, and drew himself up like a
captain of infantry. Messieurs, he continued, in French, with the
utmost dignity, I shall devote the resources of this office to
tracing out the crime, and, if possible, to effectuating the arrest
of the culpable.

We telegraphed to London, of course, and we wrote to the bank, with
a full description of the suspected person. But I need hardly add
that nothing came of it.

Three days later the Commissary called at our hotel. Well,
gentlemen, he said, I am glad to say I have discovered
everything!

What Arrested the Seer Sir Charles cried.

The Commissary drew back, almost horrified at the suggestion.

Arrested Colonel Clay he exclaimed. Mais, monsieur, we are only
human! Arrested him No, not quite. But tracked out how he did it.
That is already much--to unravel Colonel Clay, gentlemen!

Well, what do you make of it Sir Charles asked, crestfallen.

The Commissary sat down and gloated over his discovery. It was
clear a well-planned crime amused him vastly. In the first place,
monsieur, he said, disabuse your mind of the idea that when
monsieur your secretary went out to fetch Señor Herrera that night,
Señor Herrera didn't know to whose rooms he was coming. Quite
otherwise, in point of fact. I do not doubt myself that Señor
Herrera, or Colonel Clay (call him which you like), came to Nice
this winter for no other purpose than just to rob you.

But I sent for him, my brother-in-law interposed.

Yes; he _meant_ you to send for him. He forced a card, so to
speak. If he couldn't do that I guess he would be a pretty poor
conjurer. He had a lady of his own--his wife, let us say, or his
sister--stopping here at this hotel; a certain Madame Picardet.
Through her he induced several ladies of your circle to attend his
séances. She and they spoke to you about him, and aroused your
curiosity. You may bet your bottom dollar that when he came to
this room he came ready primed and prepared with endless facts
about both of you.

What fools we have been, Sey, my brother-in-law exclaimed. I see
it all now. That designing woman sent round before dinner to say I
wanted to meet him; and by the time you got there he was ready
for bamboozling me.

That's so, the Commissary answered. He had your name ready
painted on both his arms; and he had made other preparations of
still greater importance.

You mean the cheque. Well, how did he get it

The Commissary opened the door. Come in, he said. And a young man
entered whom we recognised at once as the chief clerk in the Foreign
Department of the Crédit Marseillais, the principal bank all along
the Riviera.

State what you know of this cheque, the Commissary said, showing
it to him, for we had handed it over to the police as a piece of
evidence.

About four weeks since-- the clerk began.

Say ten days before your séance, the Commissary interposed.

A gentleman with very long hair and an aquiline nose, dark,
strange, and handsome, called in at my department and asked if I
could tell him the name of Sir Charles Vandrift's London banker.
He said he had a sum to pay in to your credit, and asked if we
would forward it for him. I told him it was irregular for us to
receive the money, as you had no account with us, but that your
London bankers were Darby, Drummond, and Rothenberg, Limited.

Quite right, Sir Charles murmured.

Two days later a lady, Madame Picardet, who was a customer of ours,
brought in a good cheque for three hundred pounds, signed by a
first-rate name, and asked us to pay it in on her behalf to Darby,
Drummond, and Rothenberg's, and to open a London account with them
for her. We did so, and received in reply a cheque-book.

From which this cheque was taken, as I learn from the number,
by telegram from London, the Commissary put in. Also, that on
the same day on which your cheque was cashed, Madame Picardet,
in London, withdrew her balance.

But how did the fellow get me to sign the cheque Sir Charles
cried. How did he manage the card trick

The Commissary produced a similar card from his pocket. Was that
the sort of thing he asked.

Precisely! A facsimile.

I thought so. Well, our Colonel, I find, bought a packet of such
cards, intended for admission to a religious function, at a shop
in the Quai Massena. He cut out the centre, and, see here-- The
Commissary turned it over, and showed a piece of paper pasted neatly
over the back; this he tore off, and there, concealed behind it, lay
a folded cheque, with only the place where the signature should be
written showing through on the face which the Seer had presented
to us. I call that a neat trick, the Commissary remarked, with
professional enjoyment of a really good deception.

But he burnt the envelope before my eyes, Sir Charles exclaimed.

Pooh! the Commissary answered. What would he be worth as a
conjurer, anyway, if he couldn't substitute one envelope for another
between the table and the fireplace without your noticing it And
Colonel Clay, you must remember, is a prince among conjurers.

Well, it's a comfort to know we've identified our man, and the
woman who was with him, Sir Charles said, with a slight sigh of
relief. The next thing will be, of course, you'll follow them up
on these clues in England and arrest them

The Commissary shrugged his shoulders. Arrest them! he exclaimed,
much amused. Ah, monsieur, but you are sanguine! No officer of
justice has ever succeeded in arresting le Colonel Caoutchouc, as
we call him in French. He is as slippery as an eel, that man. He
wriggles through our fingers. Suppose even we caught him, what could
we prove I ask you. Nobody who has seen him once can ever swear
to him again in his next impersonation. He is impayable, this good
Colonel. On the day when I arrest him, I assure you, monsieur, I
shall consider myself the smartest police-officer in Europe.

Well, I shall catch him yet, Sir Charles answered, and relapsed
into silence.



II

THE EPISODE OF THE DIAMOND LINKS


Let us take a trip to Switzerland, said Lady Vandrift. And any one
who knows Amelia will not be surprised to learn that we _did_ take a
trip to Switzerland accordingly. Nobody can drive Sir Charles, except
his wife. And nobody at all can drive Amelia.

There were difficulties at the outset, because we had not ordered
rooms at the hotels beforehand, and it was well on in the season;
but they were overcome at last by the usual application of a golden
key; and we found ourselves in due time pleasantly quartered in
Lucerne, at that most comfortable of European hostelries, the
Schweitzerhof.

We were a square party of four--Sir Charles and Amelia, myself and
Isabel. We had nice big rooms, on the first floor, overlooking the
lake; and as none of us was possessed with the faintest symptom of
that incipient mania which shows itself in the form of an insane
desire to climb mountain heights of disagreeable steepness and
unnecessary snowiness, I will venture to assert we all enjoyed
ourselves. We spent most of our time sensibly in lounging about the
lake on the jolly little steamers; and when we did a mountain climb,
it was on the Rigi or Pilatus--where an engine undertook all the
muscular work for us.

As usual, at the hotel, a great many miscellaneous people showed a
burning desire to be specially nice to us. If you wish to see how
friendly and charming humanity is, just try being a well-known
millionaire for a week, and you'll learn a thing or two. Wherever
Sir Charles goes he is surrounded by charming and disinterested
people, all eager to make his distinguished acquaintance, and all
familiar with several excellent investments, or several deserving
objects of Christian charity. It is my business in life, as his
brother-in-law and secretary, to decline with thanks the excellent
investments, and to throw judicious cold water on the objects of
charity. Even I myself, as the great man's almoner, am very much
sought after. People casually allude before me to artless stories
of poor curates in Cumberland, you know, Mr. Wentworth, or widows
in Cornwall, penniless poets with epics in their desks, and young
painters who need but the breath of a patron to open to them the
doors of an admiring Academy. I smile and look wise, while I
administer cold water in minute doses; but I never report one of
these cases to Sir Charles, except in the rare or almost unheard-of
event where I think there is really something in them.

Ever since our little adventure with the Seer at Nice, Sir Charles,
who is constitutionally cautious, had been even more careful than
usual about possible sharpers. And, as chance would have it, there
sat just opposite us at table d'hôte at the Schweitzerhof--'tis
a fad of Amelia's to dine at table d'hôte; she says she can't bear
to be boxed up all day in private rooms with too much family--a
sinister-looking man with dark hair and eyes, conspicuous by his
bushy overhanging eyebrows. My attention was first called to the
eyebrows in question by a nice little parson who sat at our side,
and who observed that they were made up of certain large and bristly
hairs, which (he told us) had been traced by Darwin to our monkey
ancestors. Very pleasant little fellow, this fresh-faced young
parson, on his honeymoon tour with a nice wee wife, a bonnie Scotch
lassie with a charming accent.

I looked at the eyebrows close. Then a sudden thought struck me. Do
you believe they're his own I asked of the curate; or are they
only stuck on--a make-up disguise They really almost look like it.

You don't suppose-- Charles began, and checked himself suddenly.

Yes, I do, I answered; the Seer! Then I recollected my blunder,
and looked down sheepishly. For, to say the truth, Vandrift had
straightly enjoined on me long before to say nothing of our painful
little episode at Nice to Amelia; he was afraid if _she_ once heard
of it, _he_ would hear of it for ever after.

What Seer the little parson inquired, with parsonical curiosity.

I noticed the man with the overhanging eyebrows give a queer sort
of start. Charles's glance was fixed upon me. I hardly knew what
to answer.

Oh, a man who was at Nice with us last year, I stammered out,
trying hard to look unconcerned. A fellow they talked about,
that's all. And I turned the subject.

But the curate, like a donkey, wouldn't let me turn it.

Had he eyebrows like that he inquired, in an undertone. I was
really angry. If this _was_ Colonel Clay, the curate was obviously
giving him the cue, and making it much more difficult for us to
catch him, now we might possibly have lighted on the chance of
doing so.

No, he hadn't, I answered testily; it was a passing expression.
But this is not the man. I was mistaken, no doubt. And I nudged
him gently.

The little curate was too innocent for anything. Oh, I see, he
replied, nodding hard and looking wise. Then he turned to his wife
and made an obvious face, which the man with the eyebrows couldn't
fail to notice.

Fortunately, a political discussion going on a few places farther
down the table spread up to us and diverted attention for a moment.
The magical name of Gladstone saved us. Sir Charles flared up. I
was truly pleased, for I could see Amelia was boiling over with
curiosity by this time.

After dinner, in the billiard-room, however, the man with the big
eyebrows sidled up and began to talk to me. If he _was_ Colonel
Clay, it was evident he bore us no grudge at all for the five
thousand pounds he had done us out of. On the contrary, he seemed
quite prepared to do us out of five thousand more when opportunity
offered; for he introduced himself at once as Dr. Hector Macpherson,
the exclusive grantee of extensive concessions from the Brazilian
Government on the Upper Amazons. He dived into conversation with
me at once as to the splendid mineral resources of his Brazilian
estate--the silver, the platinum, the actual rubies, the possible
diamonds. I listened and smiled; I knew what was coming. All he
needed to develop this magnificent concession was a little more
capital. It was sad to see thousands of pounds' worth of platinum
and car-loads of rubies just crumbling in the soil or carried away
by the river, for want of a few hundreds to work them with properly.
If he knew of anybody, now, with money to invest, he could recommend
him--nay, offer him--a unique opportunity of earning, say, 40 per
cent on his capital, on unimpeachable security.

I wouldn't do it for every man, Dr. Hector Macpherson remarked,
drawing himself up; but if I took a fancy to a fellow who had
command of ready cash, I might choose to put him in the way of
feathering his nest with unexampled rapidity.

Exceedingly disinterested of you, I answered drily, fixing my
eyes on his eyebrows.

The little curate, meanwhile, was playing billiards with Sir
Charles. His glance followed mine as it rested for a moment on
the monkey-like hairs.

False, obviously false, he remarked with his lips; and I'm bound
to confess I never saw any man speak so well by movement alone;
you could follow every word though not a sound escaped him.

During the rest of that evening Dr. Hector Macpherson stuck to me
as close as a mustard-plaster. And he was almost as irritating. I
got heartily sick of the Upper Amazons. I have positively waded in
my time through ruby mines (in prospectuses, I mean) till the mere
sight of a ruby absolutely sickens me. When Charles, in an unwonted
fit of generosity, once gave his sister Isabel (whom I had the
honour to marry) a ruby necklet (inferior stones), I made Isabel
change it for sapphires and amethysts, on the judicious plea that
they suited her complexion better. (I scored one, incidentally, for
having considered Isabel's complexion.) By the time I went to bed
I was prepared to sink the Upper Amazons in the sea, and to stab,
shoot, poison, or otherwise seriously damage the man with the
concession and the false eyebrows.

For the next three days, at intervals, he returned to the charge. He
bored me to death with his platinum and his rubies. He didn't want a
capitalist who would personally exploit the thing; he would prefer
to do it all on his own account, giving the capitalist preference
debentures of his bogus company, and a lien on the concession. I
listened and smiled; I listened and yawned; I listened and was rude;
I ceased to listen at all; but still he droned on with it. I fell
asleep on the steamer one day, and woke up in ten minutes to hear
him droning yet, And the yield of platinum per ton was certified
to be-- I forget how many pounds, or ounces, or pennyweights.
These details of assays have ceased to interest me like the man
who didn't believe in ghosts, I have seen too many of them.

The fresh-faced little curate and his wife, however, were quite
different people. He was a cricketing Oxford man; she was a breezy
Scotch lass, with a wholesome breath of the Highlands about her. I
called her White Heather. Their name was Brabazon. Millionaires
are so accustomed to being beset by harpies of every description,
that when they come across a young couple who are simple and
natural, they delight in the purely human relation. We picnicked
and went excursions a great deal with the honeymooners. They were
so frank in their young love, and so proof against chaff, that we
all really liked them. But whenever I called the pretty girl White
Heather, she looked so shocked, and cried Oh, Mr. Wentworth!
Still, we were the best of friends. The curate offered to row us in
a boat on the lake one day, while the Scotch lassie assured us she
could take an oar almost as well as he did. However, we did not
accept their offer, as row-boats exert an unfavourable influence
upon Amelia's digestive organs.

Nice young fellow, that man Brabazon, Sir Charles said to me one
day, as we lounged together along the quay; never talks about
advowsons or next presentations. Doesn't seem to me to care two pins
about promotion. Says he's quite content in his country curacy;
enough to live upon, and needs no more; and his wife has a little, a
very little, money. I asked him about his poor to-day, on purpose to
test him these parsons are always trying to screw something out of
one for their poor; men in my position know the truth of the saying
that we have that class of the population always with us. Would
you believe it, he says he hasn't any poor at all in his parish!
They're all well-to-do farmers or else able-bodied labourers, and
his one terror is that somebody will come and try to pauperise them.
'If a philanthropist were to give me fifty pounds to-day for use at
Empingham,' he said, 'I assure you, Sir Charles, I shouldn't know
what to do with it. I think I should buy new dresses for Jessie, who
wants them about as much as anybody else in the village--that is to
say, not at all.' There's a parson for you, Sey, my boy. Only wish
we had one of his sort at Seldon.

He certainly doesn't want to get anything out of you, I answered.

That evening at dinner a queer little episode happened. The man
with the eyebrows began talking to me across the table in his usual
fashion, full of his wearisome concession on the Upper Amazons. I
was trying to squash him as politely as possible, when I caught
Amelia's eye. Her look amused me. She was engaged in making signals
to Charles at her side to observe the little curate's curious
sleeve-links. I glanced at them, and saw at once they were a
singular possession for so unobtrusive a person. They consisted
each of a short gold bar for one arm of the link, fastened by a
tiny chain of the same material to what seemed to my tolerably
experienced eye--a first-rate diamond. Pretty big diamonds, too,
and of remarkable shape, brilliancy, and cutting. In a moment I
knew what Amelia meant. She owned a diamond rivière, said to be
of Indian origin, but short by two stones for the circumference
of her tolerably ample neck. Now, she had long been wanting two
diamonds like these to match her set; but owing to the unusual
shape and antiquated cutting of her own gems, she had never
been able to complete the necklet, at least without removing an
extravagant amount from a much larger stone of the first water.

The Scotch lassie's eyes caught Amelia's at the same time, and she
broke into a pretty smile of good-humoured amusement. Taken in
another person, Dick, dear! she exclaimed, in her breezy way,
turning to her husband. Lady Vandrift is observing your diamond
sleeve-links.

They're very fine gems, Amelia observed incautiously. (A most
unwise admission if she desired to buy them.)

But the pleasant little curate was too transparently simple a soul
to take advantage of her slip of judgment. They _are_ good stones,
he replied; very good stones--considering. They're not diamonds
at all, to tell you the truth. They're best old-fashioned Oriental
paste. My great-grandfather bought them, after the siege of
Seringapatam, for a few rupees, from a Sepoy who had looted them
from Tippoo Sultan's palace. He thought, like you, he had got a good
thing. But it turned out, when they came to be examined by experts,
they were only paste--very wonderful paste; it is supposed they had
even imposed upon Tippoo himself, so fine is the imitation. But they
are worth--well, say, fifty shillings at the utmost.

While he spoke Charles looked at Amelia, and Amelia looked at
Charles. Their eyes spoke volumes. The rivière was also supposed to
have come from Tippoo's collection. Both drew at once an identical
conclusion. These were two of the same stones, very likely torn
apart and disengaged from the rest in the mêlée at the capture of
the Indian palace.

Can you take them off Sir Charles asked blandly. He spoke in
the tone that indicates business.

Certainly, the little curate answered, smiling. I'm accustomed to
taking them off. They're always noticed. They've been kept in the
family ever since the siege, as a sort of valueless heirloom, for
the sake of the picturesqueness of the story, you know; and nobody
ever sees them without asking, as you do, to examine them closely.
They deceive even experts at first. But they're paste, all the same;
unmitigated Oriental paste, for all that.

He took them both off, and handed them to Charles. No man in England
is a finer judge of gems than my brother-in-law. I watched him
narrowly. He examined them close, first with the naked eye, then
with the little pocket-lens which he always carries. Admirable
imitation, he muttered, passing them on to Amelia. I'm not
surprised they should impose upon inexperienced observers.

But from the tone in which he said it, I could see at once he had
satisfied himself they were real gems of unusual value. I know
Charles's way of doing business so well. His glance to Amelia meant,
These are the very stones you have so long been in search of.

The Scotch lassie laughed a merry laugh. He sees through them
now, Dick, she cried. I felt sure Sir Charles would be a judge
of diamonds.

Amelia turned them over. I know Amelia, too; and I knew from the
way Amelia looked at them that she meant to have them. And when
Amelia means to have anything, people who stand in the way may just
as well spare themselves the trouble of opposing her.

They were beautiful diamonds. We found out afterwards the little
curate's account was quite correct these stones _had_ come from
the same necklet as Amelia's rivière, made for a favourite wife of
Tippoo's, who had presumably as expansive personal charms as our
beloved sister-in-law's. More perfect diamonds have seldom been
seen. They have excited the universal admiration of thieves and
connoisseurs. Amelia told me afterwards that, according to legend,
a Sepoy stole the necklet at the sack of the palace, and then fought
with another for it. It was believed that two stones got spilt
in the scuffle, and were picked up and sold by a third person--a
looker-on--who had no idea of the value of his booty. Amelia had
been hunting for them for several years to complete her necklet.

They are excellent paste, Sir Charles observed, handing them back.
It takes a first-rate judge to detect them from the reality. Lady
Vandrift has a necklet much the same in character, but composed
of genuine stones; and as these are so much like them, and would
complete her set, to all outer appearance, I wouldn't mind giving
you, say, 10 pounds for the pair of them.

Mrs. Brabazon looked delighted. Oh, sell them to him, Dick, she
cried, and buy me a brooch with the money! A pair of common
links would do for you just as well. Ten pounds for two paste
stones! It's quite a lot of money.

She said it so sweetly, with her pretty Scotch accent, that I
couldn't imagine how Dick had the heart to refuse her. But he
did, all the same.

No, Jess, darling, he answered. They're worthless, I know; but
they have for me a certain sentimental value, as I've often told
you. My dear mother wore them, while she lived, as ear-rings; and
as soon as she died I had them set as links in order that I might
always keep them about me. Besides, they have historical and family
interest. Even a worthless heirloom, after all, _is_ an heirloom.

Dr. Hector Macpherson looked across and intervened. There is a
part of my concession, he said, where we have reason to believe a
perfect new Kimberley will soon be discovered. If at any time you
would care, Sir Charles, to look at my diamonds--when I get them--it
would afford me the greatest pleasure in life to submit them to your
consideration.

Sir Charles could stand it no longer. Sir, he said, gazing across
at him with his sternest air, if your concession were as full of
diamonds as Sindbad the Sailor's valley, I would not care to turn my
head to look at them. I am acquainted with the nature and practice
of salting. And he glared at the man with the overhanging eyebrows
as if he would devour him raw. Poor Dr. Hector Macpherson subsided
instantly. We learnt a little later that he was a harmless lunatic,
who went about the world with successive concessions for ruby mines
and platinum reefs, because he had been ruined and driven mad by
speculations in the two, and now recouped himself by imaginary
grants in Burmah and Brazil, or anywhere else that turned up handy.
And his eyebrows, after all, were of Nature's handicraft. We were
sorry for the incident; but a man in Sir Charles's position is such
a mark for rogues that, if he did not take means to protect himself
promptly, he would be for ever overrun by them.

When we went up to our salon that evening, Amelia flung herself on
the sofa. Charles, she broke out in the voice of a tragedy queen,
those are real diamonds, and I shall never be happy again till I
get them.

They are real diamonds, Charles echoed. And you shall have them,
Amelia. They're worth not less than three thousand pounds. But I
shall bid them up gently.

So, next day, Charles set to work to higgle with the curate.
Brabazon, however, didn't care to part with them. He was no
money-grubber, he said. He cared more for his mother's gift and a
family tradition than for a hundred pounds, if Sir Charles were to
offer it. Charles's eye gleamed. But if I give you _two_ hundred!
he said insinuatingly. What opportunities for good! You could
build a new wing to your village school-house!

We have ample accommodation, the curate answered. No, I don't
think I'll sell them.

Still, his voice faltered somewhat, and he looked down at them
inquiringly.

Charles was too precipitate.

A hundred pounds more or less matters little to me, he said; and
my wife has set her heart on them. It's every man's duty to please
his wife--isn't it, Mrs. Brabazon--I offer you three hundred.

The little Scotch girl clasped her hands.

Three hundred pounds! Oh, Dick, just think what fun we could have,
and what good we could do with it! Do let him have them.

Her accent was irresistible. But the curate shook his head.

Impossible, he answered. My dear mother's ear-rings! Uncle
Aubrey would be so angry if he knew I'd sold them. I daren't face
Uncle Aubrey.

Has he expectations from Uncle Aubrey Sir Charles asked of
White Heather.

Mrs. Brabazon laughed. Uncle Aubrey! Oh, dear, no. Poor dear old
Uncle Aubrey! Why, the darling old soul hasn't a penny to bless
himself with, except his pension. He's a retired post captain.
And she laughed melodiously. She was a charming woman.

Then I should disregard Uncle Aubrey's feelings, Sir Charles
said decisively.

No, no, the curate answered. Poor dear old Uncle Aubrey! I
wouldn't do anything for the world to annoy him. And he'd be sure
to notice it.

We went back to Amelia. Well, have you got them she asked.

No, Sir Charles answered. Not yet. But he's coming round, I
think. He's hesitating now. Would rather like to sell them himself,
but is afraid what 'Uncle Aubrey' would say about the matter. His
wife will talk him out of his needless consideration for Uncle
Aubrey's feelings; and to-morrow we'll finally clench the bargain.

Next morning we stayed late in our salon, where we always
breakfasted, and did not come down to the public rooms till just
before déjeûner, Sir Charles being busy with me over arrears of
correspondence. When we _did_ come down the concierge stepped
forward with a twisted little feminine note for Amelia. She took
it and read it. Her countenance fell. There, Charles, she cried,
handing it to him, you've let the chance slip. I shall _never_ be
happy now! They've gone off with the diamonds.

Charles seized the note and read it. Then he passed it on to me.
It was short, but final--


Thursday, 6 a.m.

DEAR LADY VANDRIFT--_Will_ you kindly excuse our having gone off
hurriedly without bidding you good-bye We have just had a horrid
telegram to say that Dick's favourite sister is _dangerously_ ill of
fever in Paris. I wanted to shake hands with you before we left--you
have all been so sweet to us--but we go by the morning train,
absurdly early, and I wouldn't for worlds disturb you. Perhaps some
day we may meet again--though, buried as we are in a North-country
village, it isn't likely; but in any case, you have secured the
grateful recollection of Yours very cordially, JESSIE BRABAZON.

P.S.--Kindest regards to Sir Charles and those _dear_ Wentworths,
and a kiss for yourself, if I may venture to send you one.


She doesn't even mention where they've gone, Amelia exclaimed,
in a very bad humour.

The concierge may know, Isabel suggested, looking over my
shoulder.

We asked at his office.

Yes, the gentleman's address was the Rev. Richard Peploe Brabazon,
Holme Bush Cottage, Empingham, Northumberland.

Any address where letters might be sent at once, in Paris

For the next ten days, or till further notice, Hôtel des Deux
Mondes, Avenue de l'Opéra.

Amelia's mind was made up at once.

Strike while the iron's hot, she cried. This sudden illness,
coming at the end of their honeymoon, and involving ten days' more
stay at an expensive hotel, will probably upset the curate's budget.
He'll be glad to sell now. You'll get them for three hundred. It
was absurd of Charles to offer so much at first; but offered once,
of course we must stick to it.

What do you propose to do Charles asked. Write, or telegraph

Oh, how silly men are! Amelia cried. Is this the sort of business
to be arranged by letter, still less by telegram No. Seymour must
start off at once, taking the night train to Paris; and the moment
he gets there, he must interview the curate or Mrs. Brabazon. Mrs.
Brabazon's the best. She has none of this stupid, sentimental
nonsense about Uncle Aubrey.

It is no part of a secretary's duties to act as a diamond broker.
But when Amelia puts her foot down, she puts her foot down--a fact
which she is unnecessarily fond of emphasising in that identical
proposition. So the self-same evening saw me safe in the train on
my way to Paris; and next morning I turned out of my comfortable
sleeping-car at the Gare de Strasbourg. My orders were to bring back
those diamonds, alive or dead, so to speak, in my pocket to Lucerne;
and to offer any needful sum, up to two thousand five hundred
pounds, for their immediate purchase.

When I arrived at the Deux Mondes I found the poor little curate
and his wife both greatly agitated. They had sat up all night, they
said, with their invalid sister; and the sleeplessness and suspense
had certainly told upon them after their long railway journey. They
were pale and tired, Mrs. Brabazon, in particular, looking ill and
worried--too much like White Heather. I was more than half ashamed
of bothering them about the diamonds at such a moment, but it
occurred to me that Amelia was probably right--they would now have
reached the end of the sum set apart for their Continental trip,
and a little ready cash might be far from unwelcome.

I broached the subject delicately. It was a fad of Lady Vandrift's,
I said. She had set her heart upon those useless trinkets. And she
wouldn't go without them. She must and would have them. But the
curate was obdurate. He threw Uncle Aubrey still in my teeth. Three
hundred--no, never! A mother's present; impossible, dear Jessie!
Jessie begged and prayed; she had grown really attached to Lady
Vandrift, she said; but the curate wouldn't hear of it. I went up
tentatively to four hundred. He shook his head gloomily. It wasn't
a question of money, he said. It was a question of affection. I saw
it was no use trying that tack any longer. I struck out a new line.
These stones, I said, I think I ought to inform you, are really
diamonds. Sir Charles is certain of it. Now, is it right for a man
of your profession and position to be wearing a pair of big gems
like those, worth several hundred pounds, as ordinary sleeve-links
A woman--yes, I grant you. But for a man, is it manly And you a
cricketer!

He looked at me and laughed. Will nothing convince you he cried.
They have been examined and tested by half a dozen jewellers, and
we know them to be paste. It wouldn't be right of me to sell them
to you under false pretences, however unwilling on my side. I
_couldn't_ do it.

Well, then, I said, going up a bit in my bids to meet him,
I'll put it like this. These gems are paste. But Lady Vandrift
has an unconquerable and unaccountable desire to possess them.
Money doesn't matter to her. She is a friend of your wife's. As a
personal favour, won't you sell them to her for a thousand

He shook his head. It would be wrong, he said,--I might even add,
criminal.

But we take all risk, I cried.

He was absolute adamant. As a clergyman, he answered, I feel
I cannot do it.

Will _you_ try, Mrs. Brabazon I asked.

The pretty little Scotchwoman leant over and whispered. She coaxed
and cajoled him. Her ways were winsome. I couldn't hear what she
said, but he seemed to give way at last. I should love Lady
Vandrift to have them, she murmured, turning to me. She _is_ such
a dear! And she took out the links from her husband's cuffs and
handed them across to me.

How much I asked.

Two thousand she answered, interrogatively. It was a big rise,
all at once; but such are the ways of women.

Done! I replied. Do you consent

The curate looked up as if ashamed of himself.

I consent, he said slowly, since Jessie wishes it. But as a
clergyman, and to prevent any future misunderstanding, I should
like you to give me a statement in writing that you buy them on my
distinct and positive declaration that they are made of paste--old
Oriental paste--not genuine stones, and that I do not claim any
other qualities for them.

I popped the gems into my purse, well pleased.

Certainly, I said, pulling out a paper. Charles, with his
unerring business instinct, had anticipated the request, and given
me a signed agreement to that effect.

You will take a cheque I inquired.

He hesitated.

Notes of the Bank of France would suit me better, he answered.

Very well, I replied. I will go out and get them.

How very unsuspicious some people are! He allowed me to go off--with
the stones in my pocket!

Sir Charles had given me a blank cheque, not exceeding two thousand
five hundred pounds. I took it to our agents and cashed it for notes
of the Bank of France. The curate clasped them with pleasure. And
right glad I was to go back to Lucerne that night, feeling that I
had got those diamonds into my hands for about a thousand pounds
under their real value!

At Lucerne railway station Amelia met me. She was positively
agitated.

Have you bought them, Seymour she asked.

Yes, I answered, producing my spoils in triumph.

Oh, how dreadful! she cried, drawing back. Do you think they're
real Are you sure he hasn't cheated you

Certain of it, I replied, examining them. No one can take me in,
in the matter of diamonds. Why on earth should you doubt them

Because I've been talking to Mrs. O'Hagan, at the hotel, and she
says there's a well-known trick just like that--she's read of it in
a book. A swindler has two sets--one real, one false; and he makes
you buy the false ones by showing you the real, and pretending he
sells them as a special favour.

You needn't be alarmed, I answered. I am a judge of diamonds.

I shan't be satisfied, Amelia murmured, till Charles has seen
them.

We went up to the hotel. For the first time in her life I saw Amelia
really nervous as I handed the stones to Charles to examine. Her
doubt was contagious. I half feared, myself, he might break out into
a deep monosyllabic interjection, losing his temper in haste, as he
often does when things go wrong. But he looked at them with a smile,
while I told him the price.

Eight hundred pounds less than their value, he answered, well
satisfied.

You have no doubt of their reality I asked.

Not the slightest, he replied, gazing at them. They are genuine
stones, precisely the same in quality and type as Amelia's necklet.

Amelia drew a sigh of relief. I'll go upstairs, she said slowly,
and bring down my own for you both to compare with them.

One minute later she rushed down again, breathless. Amelia is far
from slim, and I never before knew her exert herself so actively.

Charles, Charles! she cried, do you know what dreadful thing
has happened Two of my own stones are gone. He's stolen a couple
of diamonds from my necklet, and sold them back to me.

She held out the rivière. It was all too true. Two gems were
missing--and these two just fitted the empty places!

A light broke in upon me. I clapped my hand to my head. By Jove,
I exclaimed, the little curate is--Colonel Clay!

Charles clapped his own hand to his brow in turn. And Jessie, he
cried, White Heather--that innocent little Scotchwoman! I often
detected a familiar ring in her voice, in spite of the charming
Highland accent. Jessie is--Madame Picardet!

We had absolutely no evidence; but, like the Commissary at Nice,
we felt instinctively sure of it.

Sir Charles was determined to catch the rogue. This second deception
put him on his mettle. The worst of the man is, he said, he has a
method. He doesn't go out of his way to cheat us; he makes us go out
of ours to be cheated. He lays a trap, and we tumble headlong into
it. To-morrow, Sey, we must follow him on to Paris.

Amelia explained to him what Mrs. O'Hagan had said. Charles took it
all in at once, with his usual sagacity. That explains, he said,
why the rascal used this particular trick to draw us on by. If we
had suspected him he could have shown the diamonds were real, and
so escaped detection. It was a blind to draw us off from the fact
of the robbery. He went to Paris to be out of the way when the
discovery was made, and to get a clear day's start of us. What a
consummate rogue! And to do me twice running!

How did he get at my jewel-case, though Amelia exclaimed.

That's the question, Charles answered. You _do_ leave it about so!

And why didn't he steal the whole rivière at once, and sell the
gems I inquired.

Too cunning, Charles replied. This was much better business. It
isn't easy to dispose of a big thing like that. In the first place,
the stones are large and valuable; in the second place, they're
well known--every dealer has heard of the Vandrift rivière, and seen
pictures of the shape of them. They're marked gems, so to speak. No,
he played a better game--took a couple of them off, and offered them
to the only one person on earth who was likely to buy them without
suspicion. He came here, meaning to work this very trick; he had
the links made right to the shape beforehand, and then he stole the
stones and slipped them into their places. It's a wonderfully clever
trick. Upon my soul, I almost admire the fellow.

For Charles is a business man himself, and can appreciate business
capacity in others.

How Colonel Clay came to know about that necklet, and to appropriate
two of the stones, we only discovered much later. I will not here
anticipate that disclosure. One thing at a time is a good rule in
life. For the moment he succeeded in baffling us altogether.

However, we followed him on to Paris, telegraphing beforehand to the
Bank of France to stop the notes. It was all in vain. They had been
cashed within half an hour of my paying them. The curate and his
wife, we found, quitted the Hôtel des Deux Mondes for parts unknown
that same afternoon. And, as usual with Colonel Clay, they vanished
into space, leaving no clue behind them. In other words, they
changed their disguise, no doubt, and reappeared somewhere else that
night in altered characters. At any rate, no such person as the
Reverend Richard Peploe Brabazon was ever afterwards heard of--and,
for the matter of that, no such village exists as Empingham,
Northumberland.

We communicated the matter to the Parisian police. They were _most_
unsympathetic. It is no doubt Colonel Clay, said the official
whom we saw; but you seem to have little just ground of complaint
against him. As far as I can see, messieurs, there is not much to
choose between you. You, Monsieur le Chevalier, desired to buy
diamonds at the price of paste. You, madame, feared you had bought
paste at the price of diamonds. You, monsieur the secretary, tried
to get the stones from an unsuspecting person for half their value.
He took you all in, that brave Colonel Caoutchouc--it was diamond
cut diamond.

Which was true, no doubt, but by no means consoling.

We returned to the Grand Hotel. Charles was fuming with indignation.
This is really too much, he exclaimed. What an audacious rascal!
But he will never again take me in, my dear Sey. I only hope he'll
try it on. I should love to catch him. I'd know him another time,
I'm sure, in spite of his disguises. It's absurd my being tricked
twice running like this. But never again while I live! Never again,
I declare to you!

Jamais de la vie! a courier in the hall close by murmured
responsive. We stood under the verandah of the Grand Hotel, in the
big glass courtyard. And I verily believe that courier was really
Colonel Clay himself in one of his disguises.

But perhaps we were beginning to suspect him everywhere.



III

THE EPISODE OF THE OLD MASTER


Like most South Africans, Sir Charles Vandrift is anything but
sedentary. He hates sitting down. He must always trek. He cannot
live without moving about freely. Six weeks in Mayfair at a time is
as much as he can stand. Then he must run away incontinently for
rest and change to Scotland, Homburg, Monte Carlo, Biarritz. I
won't be a limpet on the rock, he says. Thus it came to pass that
in the early autumn we found ourselves stopping at the Métropole
at Brighton. We were the accustomed nice little family party--Sir
Charles and Amelia, myself and Isabel, with the suite as usual.

On the first Sunday morning after our arrival we strolled out,
Charles and I--I regret to say during the hours allotted for Divine
service--on to the King's Road, to get a whiff of fresh air, and a
glimpse of the waves that were churning the Channel. The two ladies
(with their bonnets) had gone to church; but Sir Charles had risen
late, fatigued from the week's toil, while I myself was suffering
from a matutinal headache, which I attributed to the close air in
the billiard-room overnight, combined, perhaps, with the insidious
effect of a brand of soda-water to which I was little accustomed; I
had used it to dilute my evening whisky. We were to meet our wives
afterwards at the church parade--an institution to which I believe
both Amelia and Isabel attach even greater importance than to the
sermon which precedes it.

We sat down on a glass seat. Charles gazed inquiringly up and down
the King's Road, on the look-out for a boy with Sunday papers.
At last one passed. Observer, my brother-in-law called out
laconically.

Ain't got none, the boy answered, brandishing his bundle in our
faces. 'Ave a Referee or a Pink 'Un

Charles, however, is not a Refereader, while as to the Pink 'Un, he
considers it unsuitable for public perusal on Sunday morning. It may
be read indoors, but in the open air its blush betrays it. So he
shook his head, and muttered, If you pass an Observer, send him on
here at once to me.

A polite stranger who sat close to us turned round with a pleasant
smile. Would you allow me to offer you one he said, drawing a
copy from his pocket. I fancy I bought the last. There's a run
on them to-day, you see. Important news this morning from the
Transvaal.

Charles raised his eyebrows, and accepted it, as I thought, just a
trifle grumpily. So, to remove the false impression his surliness
might produce on so benevolent a mind, I entered into conversation
with the polite stranger. He was a man of middle age, and medium
height, with a cultivated air, and a pair of gold pince-nez; his
eyes were sharp; his voice was refined; he dropped into talk before
long about distinguished people just then in Brighton. It was clear
at once that he was hand in glove with many of the very best kind.
We compared notes as to Nice, Rome, Florence, Cairo. Our new
acquaintance had scores of friends in common with us, it seemed;
indeed, our circles so largely coincided, that I wondered we had
never happened till then to knock up against one another.

And Sir Charles Vandrift, the great African millionaire, he said
at last, do you know anything of _him_ I'm told he's at present
down here at the Métropole.

I waved my hand towards the person in question.

_This_ is Sir Charles Vandrift, I answered, with proprietary pride;
and _I_ am his brother-in-law, Mr. Seymour Wentworth.

Oh, indeed! the stranger answered, with a curious air of drawing
in his horns. I wondered whether he had just been going to pretend
he knew Sir Charles, or whether perchance he was on the point of
saying something highly uncomplimentary, and was glad to have
escaped it.

By this time, however, Charles laid down the paper and chimed into
our conversation. I could see at once from his mollified tone that
the news from the Transvaal was favourable to his operations in
Cloetedorp Golcondas. He was therefore in a friendly and affable
temper. His whole manner changed at once. He grew polite in return
to the polite stranger. Besides, we knew the man moved in the best
society; he had acquaintances whom Amelia was most anxious to secure
for her At Homes in Mayfair--young Faith, the novelist, and Sir
Richard Montrose, the great Arctic traveller. As for the painters,
it was clear that he was sworn friends with the whole lot of them.
He dined with Academicians, and gave weekly breakfasts to the
members of the Institute. Now, Amelia is particularly desirous
that her salon should not be considered too exclusively financial
and political in character with a solid basis of M.P.'s and
millionaires, she loves a delicate under-current of literature,
art, and the musical glasses. Our new acquaintance was extremely
communicative Knows his place in society, Sey, Sir Charles said
to me afterwards, and is therefore not afraid of talking freely,
as so many people are who have doubts about their position. We
exchanged cards before we rose. Our new friend's name turned out
to be Dr. Edward Polperro.

In practice here I inquired, though his garb belied it.

Oh, not medical, he answered. I am an LL.D. don't you know. I
interest myself in art, and buy to some extent for the National
Gallery.

The very man for Amelia's At Homes! Sir Charles snapped at him
instantly. I've brought my four-in-hand down here with me, he
said, in his best friendly manner, and we think of tooling over
to-morrow to Lewes. If you'd care to take a seat I'm sure Lady
Vandrift would be charmed to see you.

You're very kind, the Doctor said, on so casual an introduction.
I'm sure I shall be delighted.

We start from the Métropole at ten-thirty, Charles went on.

I shall be there. Good morning! And, with a satisfied smile, he
rose and left us, nodding.

We returned to the lawn, to Amelia and Isabel. Our new friend passed
us once or twice. Charles stopped him and introduced him. He was
walking with two ladies, most elegantly dressed in rather peculiar
artistic dresses. Amelia was taken at first sight by his manner.
One could see at a glance, she said, he was a person of culture
and of real distinction. I wonder whether he could bring the P.R.A.
to my Parliamentary 'At Home' on Wednesday fortnight

Next day, at ten-thirty, we started on our drive. Our team has been
considered the best in Sussex. Charles is an excellent, though
somewhat anxious--or, might I say better, somewhat careful--whip.
He finds the management of two leaders and two wheelers fills his
hands for the moment, both literally and figuratively, leaving very
little time for general conversation. Lady Belleisle of Beacon
bloomed beside him on the box (her bloom is perennial, and applied
by her maid); Dr. Polperro occupied the seat just behind with myself
and Amelia. The Doctor talked most of the time to Lady Vandrift his
discourse was of picture-galleries, which Amelia detests, but in
which she thinks it incumbent upon her, as Sir Charles's wife, to
affect now and then a cultivated interest. Noblesse oblige; and the
walls of Castle Seldon, our place in Ross-shire, are almost covered
now with Leaders and with Orchardsons. This result was first arrived
at by a singular accident. Sir Charles wanted a leader--for his
coach, you understand--and told an artistic friend so. The artistic
friend brought him a Leader next week with a capital L; and Sir
Charles was so taken aback that he felt ashamed to confess the
error. So he was turned unawares into a patron of painting.

Dr. Polperro, in spite of his too pronouncedly artistic talk, proved
on closer view a most agreeable companion. He diversified his art
cleverly with anecdotes and scandals; he told us exactly which
famous painters had married their cooks, and which had only married
their models; and otherwise showed himself a most diverting talker.
Among other things, however, he happened to mention once that he
had recently discovered a genuine Rembrandt--a quite undoubted
Rembrandt, which had remained for years in the keeping of a
certain obscure Dutch family. It had always been allowed to be a
masterpiece of the painter, but it had seldom been seen for the
last half-century save by a few intimate acquaintances. It was a
portrait of one Maria Vanrenen of Haarlem, and he had bought it
of her descendants at Gouda, in Holland.

I saw Charles prick up his ears, though he took no open notice.
This Maria Vanrenen, as it happened, was a remote collateral
ancestress of the Vandrifts, before they emigrated to the Cape in
1780; and the existence of the portrait, though not its whereabouts,
was well known in the family. Isabel had often mentioned it. If it
was to be had at anything like a reasonable price, it would be a
splendid thing for the boys (Sir Charles, I ought to say, has two
sons at Eton) to possess an undoubted portrait of an ancestress
by Rembrandt.

Dr. Polperro talked a good deal after that about this valuable find.
He had tried to sell it at first to the National Gallery; but
though the Directors admired the work immensely, and admitted its
genuineness, they regretted that the funds at their disposal this
year did not permit them to acquire so important a canvas at a
proper figure. South Kensington again was too poor; but the Doctor
was in treaty at present with the Louvre and with Berlin. Still,
it was a pity a fine work of art like that, once brought into the
country, should be allowed to go out of it. Some patriotic patron
of the fine arts ought to buy it for his own house, or else
munificently present it to the nation.

All the time Charles said nothing. But I could feel him cogitating.
He even looked behind him once, near a difficult corner (while the
guard was actually engaged in tootling his horn to let passers-by
know that the coach was coming), and gave Amelia a warning glance
to say nothing committing, which had at once the requisite effect
of sealing her mouth for the moment. It is a very unusual thing
for Charles to look back while driving. I gathered from his doing
so that he was inordinately anxious to possess this Rembrandt.

When we arrived at Lewes we put up our horses at the inn,
and Charles ordered a lunch on his wonted scale of princely
magnificence. Meanwhile we wandered, two and two, about the town
and castle. I annexed Lady Belleisle, who is at least amusing.
Charles drew me aside before starting. Look here, Sey, he
said, we must be _very_ careful. This man, Polperro, is a chance
acquaintance. There's nothing an astute rogue can take one in over
more easily than an Old Master. If the Rembrandt is genuine I
ought to have it; if it really represents Maria Vanrenen, it's a
duty I owe to the boys to buy it. But I've been done twice lately,
and I won't be done a third time. We must go to work cautiously.

You are right, I answered. No more seers and curates!

If this man's an impostor, Charles went on--and in spite of what
he says about the National Gallery and so forth, we know nothing of
him--the story he tells is just the sort of one such a fellow would
trump up in a moment to deceive me. He could easily learn who I
was--I'm a well-known figure; he knew I was in Brighton, and he
may have been sitting on that glass seat on Sunday on purpose to
entrap me.

He introduced your name, I said, and the moment he found out who
I was he plunged into talk with me.

Yes, Charles continued. He may have learned about the portrait
of Maria Vanrenen, which my grandmother always said was preserved
at Gouda; and, indeed, I myself have often mentioned it, as you
doubtless remember. If so, what more natural, say, for a rogue than
to begin talking about the portrait in that innocent way to Amelia
If he wants a Rembrandt, I believe they can be turned out to order
to any amount in Birmingham. The moral of all which is, it behoves
us to be careful.

Right you are, I answered; and I am keeping my eye upon him.

We drove back by another road, overshadowed by beech-trees in
autumnal gold. It was a delightful excursion. Dr. Polperro's heart
was elated by lunch and the excellent dry Monopole. He talked
amazingly. I never heard a man with a greater or more varied flow
of anecdote. He had been everywhere and knew all about everybody.
Amelia booked him at once for her At Home on Wednesday week,
and he promised to introduce her to several artistic and literary
celebrities.

That evening, however, about half-past seven, Charles and I strolled
out together on the King's Road for a blow before dinner. We dine at
eight. The air was delicious. We passed a small new hotel, very
smart and exclusive, with a big bow window. There, in evening dress,
lights burning and blind up, sat our friend, Dr. Polperro, with a
lady facing him, young, graceful, and pretty. A bottle of champagne
stood open before him. He was helping himself plentifully to
hot-house grapes, and full of good humour. It was clear he and the
lady were occupied in the intense enjoyment of some capital joke;
for they looked queerly at one another, and burst now and again
into merry peals of laughter.

I drew back. So did Sir Charles. One idea passed at once through
both our minds. I murmured, Colonel Clay! He answered, _and_
Madame Picardet!

They were not in the least like the Reverend Richard and Mrs.
Brabazon. But that clinched the matter. Nor did I see a sign of the
aquiline nose of the Mexican Seer. Still, I had learnt by then to
discount appearances. If these were indeed the famous sharper and
his wife or accomplice, we must be very careful. We were forewarned
this time. Supposing he had the audacity to try a third trick of
the sort upon us we had him under our thumbs. Only, we must take
steps to prevent his dexterously slipping through our fingers.

He can wriggle like an eel, said the Commissary at Nice. We both
recalled those words, and laid our plans deep to prevent the man's
wriggling away from us on this third occasion.

I tell you what it is, Sey, my brother-in-law said, with
impressive slowness. This time we must deliberately lay ourselves
out to be swindled. We must propose of our own accord to buy the
picture, making him guarantee it in writing as a genuine Rembrandt,
and taking care to tie him down by most stringent conditions. But
we must seem at the same time to be unsuspicious and innocent as
babes; we must swallow whole whatever lies he tells us; pay his
price--nominally--by cheque for the portrait; and then, arrest him
the moment the bargain is complete, with the proofs of his guilt
then and there upon him. Of course, what he'll try to do will be to
vanish into thin air at once, as he did at Nice and Paris; but, this
time, we'll have the police in waiting and everything ready. We'll
avoid precipitancy, but we'll avoid delay too. We must hold our
hands off till he's actually accepted and pocketed the money; and
then, we must nab him instantly, and walk him off to the local Bow
Street. That's my plan of campaign. Meanwhile, we should appear
all trustful innocence and confiding guilelessness.

In pursuance of this well-laid scheme, we called next day on Dr.
Polperro at his hotel, and were introduced to his wife, a dainty
little woman, in whom we affected not to recognise that arch Madame
Picardet or that simple White Heather. The Doctor talked charmingly
(as usual) about art--what a well-informed rascal he was, to be
sure!--and Sir Charles expressed some interest in the supposed
Rembrandt. Our new friend was delighted; we could see by his
well-suppressed eagerness of tone that he knew us at once for
probable purchasers. He would run up to town next day, he said, and
bring down the portrait. And in effect, when Charles and I took our
wonted places in the Pullman next morning, on our way up to the
half-yearly meeting of Cloetedorp Golcondas, there was our Doctor,
leaning back in his arm-chair as if the car belonged to him. Charles
gave me an expressive look. Does it in style, he whispered,
doesn't he Takes it out of my five thousand; or discounts the
amount he means to chouse me of with his spurious Rembrandt.

Arrived in town, we went to work at once. We set a private detective
from Marvillier's to watch our friend; and from him we learned that
the so-called Doctor dropped in for a picture that day at a dealer's
in the West-end (I suppress the name, having a judicious fear of
the law of libel ever before my eyes), a dealer who was known to be
mixed up before then in several shady or disreputable transactions.
Though, to be sure, my experience has been that picture dealers
are--picture dealers. Horses rank first in my mind as begetters and
producers of unscrupulous agents, but pictures run them a very good
second. Anyhow, we found out that our distinguished art-critic
picked up his Rembrandt at this dealer's shop, and came down with
it in his care the same night to Brighton.

In order not to act precipitately, and so ruin our plans, we induced
Dr. Polperro (what a cleverly chosen name!) to bring the Rembrandt
round to the Métropole for our inspection, and to leave it with us
while we got the opinion of an expert from London.

The expert came down, and gave us a full report upon the alleged
Old Master. In his judgment, it was not a Rembrandt at all, but
a cunningly-painted and well-begrimed modern Dutch imitation.
Moreover, he showed us by documentary evidence that the real
portrait of Maria Vanrenen had, as a matter of fact, been brought
to England five years before, and sold to Sir J. H. Tomlinson, the
well-known connoisseur, for eight thousand pounds. Dr. Polperro's
picture was, therefore, at best either a replica by Rembrandt; or
else, more probably, a copy by a pupil; or, most likely of all,
a mere modern forgery.

We were thus well prepared to fasten our charge of criminal
conspiracy upon the self-styled Doctor. But in order to make
assurance still more certain, we threw out vague hints to him that
the portrait of Maria Vanrenen might really be elsewhere, and even
suggested in his hearing that it might not improbably have got into
the hands of that omnivorous collector, Sir J. H. Tomlinson. But
the vendor was proof against all such attempts to decry his goods.
He had the effrontery to brush away the documentary evidence, and to
declare that Sir J. H. Tomlinson (one of the most learned and astute
picture-buyers in England) had been smartly imposed upon by a needy
Dutch artist with a talent for forgery. The real Maria Vanrenen, he
declared and swore, was the one he offered us. Success has turned
the man's head, Charles said to me, well pleased. He thinks we
will swallow any obvious lie he chooses to palm off upon us. But the
bucket has come once too often to the well. This time we checkmate
him. It was a mixed metaphor, I admit; but Sir Charles's tropes
are not always entirely superior to criticism.

So we pretended to believe our man, and accepted his assurances.
Next came the question of price. This was warmly debated, for form's
sake only. Sir J. H. Tomlinson had paid eight thousand for his
genuine Maria. The Doctor demanded ten thousand for his spurious
one. There was really no reason why we should higgle and dispute,
for Charles meant merely to give his cheque for the sum and then
arrest the fellow; but, still, we thought it best for the avoidance
of suspicion to make a show of resistance; and we at last beat him
down to nine thousand guineas. For this amount he was to give us a
written warranty that the work he sold us was a genuine Rembrandt,
that it represented Maria Vanrenen of Haarlem, and that he had
bought it direct, without doubt or question, from that good lady's
descendants at Gouda, in Holland.

It was capitally done. We arranged the thing to perfection. We had a
constable in waiting in our rooms at the Métropole, and we settled
that Dr. Polperro was to call at the hotel at a certain fixed hour
to sign the warranty and receive his money. A regular agreement on
sound stamped paper was drawn out between us. At the appointed time
the party of the first part came, having already given us over
possession of the portrait. Charles drew a cheque for the amount
agreed upon, and signed it. Then he handed it to the Doctor.
Polperro just clutched at it. Meanwhile, I took up my post by
the door, while two men in plain clothes, detectives from the
police-station, stood as men-servants and watched the windows. We
feared lest the impostor, once he had got the cheque, should dodge
us somehow, as he had already done at Nice and in Paris. The moment
he had pocketed his money with a smile of triumph, I advanced to him
rapidly. I had in my possession a pair of handcuffs. Before he knew
what was happening, I had slipped them on his wrists and secured
them dexterously, while the constable stepped forward. We have got
you this time! I cried. We know who you are, Dr. Polperro. You
are--Colonel Clay, alias Señor Antonio Herrera, alias the Reverend
Richard Peploe Brabazon.

I never saw any man so astonished in my life! He was utterly
flabbergasted. Charles thought he must have expected to get clear
away at once, and that this prompt action on our part had taken
the fellow so much by surprise as to simply unman him. He gazed
about him as if he hardly realised what was happening.

Are these two raving maniacs he asked at last, or what do they
mean by this nonsensical gibberish about Antonio Herrera

The constable laid his hand on the prisoner's shoulder.

It's all right, my man, he said. We've got warrants out against
you. I arrest you, Edward Polperro, alias the Reverend Richard
Peploe Brabazon, on a charge of obtaining money under false
pretences from Sir Charles Vandrift, K.C.M.G., M.P., on his sworn
information, now here subscribed to. For Charles had had the
thing drawn out in readiness beforehand.

Our prisoner drew himself up. Look here, officer, he said, in an
offended tone, there's some mistake here in this matter. I have
never given an alias at any time in my life. How do you know this
is really Sir Charles Vandrift It may be a case of bullying
personation. My belief is, though, they're a pair of escaped
lunatics.

We'll see about that to-morrow, the constable said, collaring him.
At present you've got to go off with me quietly to the station,
where these gentlemen will enter up the charge against you.

They carried him off, protesting. Charles and I signed the
charge-sheet; and the officer locked him up to await his examination
next day before the magistrate.

We were half afraid even now the fellow would manage somehow to
get out on bail and give us the slip in spite of everything;
and, indeed, he protested in the most violent manner against the
treatment to which we were subjecting a gentleman in his position.
But Charles took care to tell the police it was all right; that he
was a dangerous and peculiarly slippery criminal, and that on no
account must they let him go on any pretext whatever, till he had
been properly examined before the magistrates.

We learned at the hotel that night, curiously enough, that there
really _was_ a Dr. Polperro, a distinguished art critic, whose
name, we didn't doubt, our impostor had been assuming.

Next morning, when we reached the court, an inspector met us with a
very long face. Look here, gentlemen, he said, I'm afraid you've
committed a very serious blunder. You've made a precious bad mess of
it. You've got yourselves into a scrape; and, what's worse, you've
got us into one also. You were a deal too smart with your sworn
information. We've made inquiries about this gentleman, and we find
the account he gives of himself is perfectly correct. His name _is_
Polperro; he's a well-known art critic and collector of pictures,
employed abroad by the National Gallery. He was formerly an official
in the South Kensington Museum, and he's a C.B. and LL.D., very
highly respected. You've made a sad mistake, that's where it is; and
you'll probably have to answer a charge of false imprisonment, in
which I'm afraid you have also involved our own department.

Charles gasped with horror. You haven't let him out, he cried, on
those absurd representations You haven't let him slip through your
hands as you did that murderer fellow

Let him slip through our hands the inspector cried. I only wish
he would. There's no chance of that, unfortunately. He's in the
court there, this moment, breathing out fire and slaughter against
you both; and we're here to protect you if he should happen to fall
upon you. He's been locked up all night on your mistaken affidavits,
and, naturally enough, he's mad with anger.

If you haven't let him go, I'm satisfied, Charles answered.
He's a fox for cunning. Where is he Let me see him.

We went into the court. There we saw our prisoner conversing
amicably, in the most excited way, with the magistrate (who, it
seems, was a personal friend of his); and Charles at once went
up and spoke to them. Dr. Polperro turned round and glared at him
through his pince-nez.

The only possible explanation of this person's extraordinary and
incredible conduct, he said, is, that he must be mad--and his
secretary equally so. He made my acquaintance, unasked, on a glass
seat on the King's Road; invited me to go on his coach to Lewes;
volunteered to buy a valuable picture of me; and then, at the
last moment, unaccountably gave me in charge on this silly and
preposterous trumped-up accusation. I demand a summons for false
imprisonment.

Suddenly it began to dawn upon us that the tables were turned. By
degrees it came out that we had made a mistake. Dr. Polperro was
really the person he represented himself to be, and had been always.
His picture, we found out, was the real Maria Vanrenen, and a
genuine Rembrandt, which he had merely deposited for cleaning and
restoring at the suspicious dealer's. Sir J. H. Tomlinson had been
imposed upon and cheated by a cunning Dutchman; _his_ picture, though
also an undoubted Rembrandt, was _not_ the Maria, and was an inferior
specimen in bad preservation. The authority we had consulted turned
out to be an ignorant, self-sufficient quack. The Maria, moreover,
was valued by other experts at no more than five or six thousand
guineas. Charles wanted to cry off his bargain, but Dr. Polperro
naturally wouldn't hear of it. The agreement was a legally binding
instrument, and what passed in Charles's mind at the moment had
nothing to do with the written contract. Our adversary only
consented to forego the action for false imprisonment on condition
that Charles inserted a printed apology in the Times, and paid him
five hundred pounds compensation for damage to character. So that
was the end of our well-planned attempt to arrest the swindler.

Not quite the end, however; for, of course, after this, the whole
affair got by degrees into the papers. Dr. Polperro, who was a
familiar person in literary and artistic society, as it turned out,
brought an action against the so-called expert who had declared
against the genuineness of his alleged Rembrandt, and convicted him
of the grossest ignorance and misstatement. Then paragraphs got
about. The World showed us up in a sarcastic article; and Truth,
which has always been terribly severe upon Sir Charles and all the
other South Africans, had a pungent set of verses on High Art in
Kimberley. By this means, as we suppose, the affair became known
to Colonel Clay himself; for a week or two later my brother-in-law
received a cheerful little note on scented paper from our persistent
sharper. It was couched in these terms--


Oh, you innocent infant!

Bless your ingenuous little heart! And did it believe, then, it
had positively caught the redoubtable colonel And had it ready a
nice little pinch of salt to put upon his tail And is it true its
respected name is Sir Simple Simon How heartily we have laughed,
White Heather and I, at your neat little ruses! It would pay you,
by the way, to take White Heather into your house for six months
to instruct you in the agreeable sport of amateur detectives. Your
charming naivete quite moves our envy. So you actually imagined a
man of my brains would condescend to anything so flat and stale as
the silly and threadbare Old Master deception! And this in the
so-called nineteenth century! O sancta simplicitas! When again
shall such infantile transparency be mine When, ah, when But never
mind, dear friend. Though you didn't catch me, we shall meet before
long at some delightful Philippi.

Yours, with the profoundest respect and gratitude,

ANTONIO HERRERA,

Otherwise RICHARD PEPLOE BRABAZON.


Charles laid down the letter with a deep-drawn sigh. Sey, my boy,
he mused aloud, no fortune on earth--not even mine--can go on
standing it. These perpetual drains begin really to terrify me. I
foresee the end. I shall die in a workhouse. What with the money he
robs me of when he _is_ Colonel Clay, and the money I waste upon him
when he _isn't_ Colonel Clay, the man is beginning to tell upon my
nervous system. I shall withdraw altogether from this worrying life.
I shall retire from a scheming and polluted world to some untainted
spot in the fresh, pure mountains.

You _must_ need rest and change, I said, when you talk like that.
Let us try the Tyrol.



IV

THE EPISODE OF THE TYROLEAN CASTLE


We went to Meran. The place was practically decided for us by
Amelia's French maid, who really acts on such occasions as our
guide and courier.

She is _such_ a clever girl, is Amelia's French maid. Whenever we
are going anywhere, Amelia generally asks (and accepts) her advice
as to choice of hotels and furnished villas. Césarine has been all
over the Continent in her time; and, being Alsatian by birth, she of
course speaks German as well as she speaks French, while her long
residence with Amelia has made her at last almost equally at home
in our native English. She is a treasure, that girl; so neat and
dexterous, and not above dabbling in anything on earth she may be
asked to turn her hand to. She walks the world with a needle-case
in one hand and an etna in the other. She can cook an omelette on
occasion, or drive a Norwegian cariole; she can sew, and knit, and
make dresses, and cure a cold, and do anything else on earth you ask
her. Her salads are the most savoury I ever tasted; while as for her
coffee (which she prepares for us in the train on long journeys),
there isn't a chef de cuisine at a West-end club to be named in the
same day with her.

So, when Amelia said, in her imperious way, Césarine, we want to go
to the Tyrol--now--at once--in mid-October; where do you advise us
to put up--Césarine answered, like a shot, The Erzherzog Johann,
of course, at Meran, for the autumn, madame.

Is he ... an archduke Amelia asked, a little staggered at such
apparent familiarity with Imperial personages.

Ma foi! no, madame. He is an hotel--as you would say in England,
the 'Victoria' or the 'Prince of Wales's'--the most comfortable
hotel in all South Tyrol; and at this time of year, naturally, you
must go beyond the Alps; it begins already to be cold at Innsbruck.

So to Meran we went; and a prettier or more picturesque place, I
confess, I have seldom set eyes on. A rushing torrent; high hills
and mountain peaks; terraced vineyard slopes; old walls and towers;
quaint, arcaded streets; a craggy waterfall; a promenade after
the fashion of a German Spa; and when you lift your eyes from the
ground, jagged summits of Dolomites it was a combination such as
I had never before beheld; a Rhine town plumped down among green
Alpine heights, and threaded by the cool colonnades of Italy.

I approved Césarine's choice; and I was particularly glad she
had pronounced for an hotel, where all is plain sailing, instead
of advising a furnished villa, the arrangements for which would
naturally have fallen in large part upon the shoulders of the
wretched secretary. As in any case I have to do three hours' work
a day, I feel that such additions to my normal burden may well
be spared me. I tipped Césarine half a sovereign, in fact, for
her judicious choice. Césarine glanced at it on her palm in her
mysterious, curious, half-smiling way, and pocketed it at once with
a Merci, monsieur! that had a touch of contempt in it. I always
fancy Césarine has large ideas of her own on the subject of tipping,
and thinks very small beer of the modest sums a mere secretary can
alone afford to bestow upon her.

The great peculiarity of Meran is the number of schlosses (I believe
my plural is strictly irregular, but very convenient to English
ears) which you can see in every direction from its outskirts. A
statistical eye, it is supposed, can count no fewer than forty of
these picturesque, ramshackled old castles from a point on the
Küchelberg. For myself, I hate statistics (except as an element in
financial prospectuses), and I really don't know how many ruinous
piles Isabel and Amelia counted under Césarine's guidance; but I
remember that most of them were quaint and beautiful, and that their
variety of architecture seemed positively bewildering. One would be
square, with funny little turrets stuck out at each angle; while
another would rejoice in a big round keep, and spread on either side
long, ivy-clad walls and delightful bastions. Charles was immensely
taken with them. He loves the picturesque, and has a poet hidden
in that financial soul of his. (Very effectually hidden, though, I
am ready to grant you.) From the moment he came he felt at once
he would love to possess a castle of his own among these romantic
mountains. Seldon! he exclaimed contemptuously. They call Seldon
a castle! But you and I know very well, Sey, it was built in 1860,
with sham antique stones, for Macpherson of Seldon, at market rates,
by Cubitt and Co., worshipful contractors of London. Macpherson
charged me for that sham antiquity a preposterous price, at
which one ought to procure a real ancestral mansion. Now, _these_
castles are real. They are hoary with antiquity. Schloss Tyrol is
Romanesque--tenth or eleventh century. (He had been reading it up
in Baedeker.) That's the sort of place for _me_!--tenth or eleventh
century. I could live here, remote from stocks and shares, for ever;
and in these sequestered glens, recollect, Sey, my boy, there are
no Colonel Clays, and no arch Madame Picardets!

As a matter of fact, he could have lived there six weeks, and then
tired for Park Lane, Monte Carlo, Brighton.

As for Amelia, strange to say, she was equally taken with this new
fad of Charles's. As a rule she hates everywhere on earth save
London, except during the time when no respectable person can be
seen in town, and when modest blinds shade the scandalised face of
Mayfair and Belgravia. She bores herself to death even at Seldon
Castle, Ross-shire, and yawns all day long in Paris or Vienna. She
is a confirmed Cockney. Yet, for some occult reason, my amiable
sister-in-law fell in love with South Tyrol. She wanted to vegetate
in that lush vegetation. The grapes were being picked; pumpkins hung
over the walls; Virginia creeper draped the quaint gray schlosses
with crimson cloaks; and everything was as beautiful as a dream of
Burne-Jones's. (I know I am quite right in mentioning Burne-Jones,
especially in connection with Romanesque architecture, because I
heard him highly praised on that very ground by our friend and
enemy, Dr. Edward Polperro.) So perhaps it was excusable that
Amelia should fall in love with it all, under the circumstances;
besides, she is largely influenced by what Césarine says, and
Césarine declares there is no climate in Europe like Meran in
winter. I do not agree with her. The sun sets behind the hills at
three in the afternoon, and a nasty warm wind blows moist over
the snow in January and February.

However, Amelia set Césarine to inquire of the people at the hotel
about the market price of tumbledown ruins, and the number of such
eligible family mausoleums just then for sale in the immediate
neighbourhood. Césarine returned with a full, true, and particular
list, adorned with flowers of rhetoric which would have delighted
the soul of good old John Robins. They were all picturesque, all
Romanesque, all richly ivy-clad, all commodious, all historical,
and all the property of high well-born Grafs and very honourable
Freiherrs. Most of them had been the scene of celebrated tournaments;
several of them had witnessed the gorgeous marriages of Holy Roman
Emperors; and every one of them was provided with some choice and
selected first-class murders. Ghosts could be arranged for or not,
as desired; and armorial bearings could be thrown in with the moat
for a moderate extra remuneration.

The two we liked best of all these tempting piles were Schloss
Planta and Schloss Lebenstein. We drove past both, and even I
myself, I confess, was distinctly taken with them. (Besides, when
a big purchase like this is on the stocks, a poor beggar of a
secretary has always a chance of exerting his influence and earning
for himself some modest commission.) Schloss Planta was the most
striking externally, I should say, with its Rhine-like towers, and
its great gnarled ivy-stems, that looked as if they antedated the
House of Hapsburg; but Lebenstein was said to be better preserved
within, and more fitted in every way for modern occupation. Its
staircase has been photographed by 7000 amateurs.

We got tickets to view. The invaluable Césarine procured them for
us. Armed with these, we drove off one fine afternoon, meaning to
go to Planta, by Césarine's recommendation. Half-way there, however,
we changed our minds, as it was such a lovely day, and went on up
the long, slow hill to Lebenstein. I must say the drive through the
grounds was simply charming. The castle stands perched (say rather
poised, like St. Michael the archangel in Italian pictures) on a
solitary stack or crag of rock, looking down on every side upon
its own rich vineyards. Chestnuts line the glens; the valley of
the Etsch spreads below like a picture.

The vineyards alone make a splendid estate, by the way; they produce
a delicious red wine, which is exported to Bordeaux, and there
bottled and sold as a vintage claret under the name of Chateau
Monnivet. Charles revelled in the idea of growing his own wines.

Here we could sit, he cried to Amelia, in the most literal sense,
under our own vine and fig-tree. Delicious retirement! For my part,
I'm sick and tired of the hubbub of Threadneedle Street.

We knocked at the door--for there was really no bell, but a
ponderous, old-fashioned, wrought-iron knocker. So deliciously
mediæval! The late Graf von Lebenstein had recently died, we
knew; and his son, the present Count, a young man of means, having
inherited from his mother's family a still more ancient and
splendid schloss in the Salzburg district, desired to sell this
outlying estate in order to afford himself a yacht, after the manner
that is now becoming increasingly fashionable with the noblemen and
gentlemen in Germany and Austria.

The door was opened for us by a high well-born menial, attired in
a very ancient and honourable livery. Nice antique hall; suits of
ancestral armour, trophies of Tyrolese hunters, coats of arms of
ancient counts--the very thing to take Amelia's aristocratic and
romantic fancy. The whole to be sold exactly as it stood; ancestors
to be included at a valuation.

We went through the reception-rooms. They were lofty, charming, and
with glorious views, all the more glorious for being framed by those
graceful Romanesque windows, with their slender pillars and quaint,
round-topped arches. Sir Charles had made his mind up. I must and
will have it! he cried. This is the place for me. Seldon! Pah,
Seldon is a modern abomination.

Could we see the high well-born Count The liveried servant
(somewhat haughtily) would inquire of his Serenity. Sir Charles
sent up his card, and also Lady Vandrift's. These foreigners know
title spells money in England.

He was right in his surmise. Two minutes later the Count entered
with our cards in his hands. A good-looking young man, with the
characteristic Tyrolese long black moustache, dressed in a
gentlemanly variant on the costume of the country. His air was a
jager's; the usual blackcock's plume stuck jauntily in the side of
the conical hat (which he held in his hand), after the universal
Austrian fashion.

He waved us to seats. We sat down. He spoke to us in French; his
English, he remarked, with a pleasant smile, being a négligeable
quantity. We might speak it, he went on; he could understand pretty
well; but he preferred to answer, if we would allow him, in French
or German.

French, Charles replied, and the negotiation continued thenceforth
in that language. It is the only one, save English and his ancestral
Dutch, with which my brother-in-law possesses even a nodding
acquaintance.

We praised the beautiful scene. The Count's face lighted up with
patriotic pride. Yes; it was beautiful, beautiful, his own green
Tyrol. He was proud of it and attached to it. But he could endure
to sell this place, the home of his fathers, because he had a finer
in the Salzkammergut, and a pied-à-terre near Innsbruck. For Tyrol
lacked just one joy--the sea. He was a passionate yachtsman. For
that he had resolved to sell this estate; after all, three country
houses, a ship, and a mansion in Vienna, are more than one man can
comfortably inhabit.

Exactly, Charles answered. If I can come to terms with you about
this charming estate I shall sell my own castle in the Scotch
Highlands. And he tried to look like a proud Scotch chief who
harangues his clansmen.

Then they got to business. The Count was a delightful man to do
business with. His manners were perfect. While we were talking to
him, a surly person, a steward or bailiff, or something of the sort,
came into the room unexpectedly and addressed him in German, which
none of us understand. We were impressed by the singular urbanity
and benignity of the nobleman's demeanour towards this sullen
dependant. He evidently explained to the fellow what sort of
people we were, and remonstrated with him in a very gentle way for
interrupting us. The steward understood, and clearly regretted his
insolent air; for after a few sentences he went out, and as he did
so he bowed and made protestations of polite regard in his own
language. The Count turned to us and smiled. Our people, he said,
are like your own Scotch peasants--kind-hearted, picturesque, free,
musical, poetic, but wanting, hélas, in polish to strangers. He
was certainly an exception, if he described them aright; for he made
us feel at home from the moment we entered.

He named his price in frank terms. His lawyers at Meran held the
needful documents, and would arrange the negotiations in detail with
us. It was a stiff sum, I must say--an extremely stiff sum; but no
doubt he was charging us a fancy price for a fancy castle. He will
come down in time, Charles said. The sum first named in all these
transactions is invariably a feeler. They know I'm a millionaire;
and people always imagine millionaires are positively made of
money.

I may add that people always imagine it must be easier to squeeze
money out of millionaires than out of other people--which is the
reverse of the truth, or how could they ever have amassed their
millions Instead of oozing gold as a tree oozes gum, they mop it
up like blotting-paper, and seldom give it out again.

We drove back from this first interview none the less very well
satisfied. The price was too high; but preliminaries were arranged,
and for the rest, the Count desired us to discuss all details with
his lawyers in the chief street, Unter den Lauben. We inquired about
these lawyers, and found they were most respectable and respected
men; they had done the family business on either side for seven
generations.

They showed us plans and title-deeds. Everything quite en régle.
Till we came to the price there was no hitch of any sort.

As to price, however, the lawyers were obdurate. They stuck out for
the Count's first sum to the uttermost florin. It was a very big
estimate. We talked and shilly-shallied till Sir Charles grew angry.
He lost his temper at last.

They know I'm a millionaire, Sey, he said, and they're playing
the old game of trying to diddle me. But I won't be diddled. Except
Colonel Clay, no man has ever yet succeeded in bleeding me. And
shall I let myself be bled as if I were a chamois among these
innocent mountains Perish the thought! Then he reflected a little
in silence. Sey, he mused on, at last, the question is, _are_
they innocent Do you know, I begin to believe there is no such
thing left as pristine innocence anywhere. This Tyrolese Count knows
the value of a pound as distinctly as if he hung out in Capel Court
or Kimberley.

Things dragged on in this way, inconclusively, for a week or two.
_We_ bid down; the lawyers stuck to it. Sir Charles grew half sick
of the whole silly business. For my own part, I felt sure if the
high well-born Count didn't quicken his pace, my respected relative
would shortly have had enough of the Tyrol altogether, and be proof
against the most lovely of crag-crowning castles. But the Count
didn't see it. He came to call on us at our hotel--a rare honour for
a stranger with these haughty and exclusive Tyrolese nobles--and
even entered unannounced in the most friendly manner. But when it
came to L. s. d., he was absolute adamant. Not one kreutzer would
he abate from his original proposal.

You misunderstand, he said, with pride. We Tyrolese gentlemen are
not shopkeepers or merchants. We do not higgle. If we say a thing we
stick to it. Were you an Austrian, I should feel insulted by your
ill-advised attempt to beat down my price. But as you belong to a
great commercial nation-- he broke off with a snort and shrugged
his shoulders compassionately.

We saw him several times driving in and out of the schloss, and
every time he waved his hand at us gracefully. But when we tried to
bargain, it was always the same thing he retired behind the shelter
of his Tyrolese nobility. We might take it or leave it. 'Twas still
Schloss Lebenstein.

The lawyers were as bad. We tried all we knew, and got no forrarder.

At last Charles gave up the attempt in disgust. He was tiring, as I
expected. It's the prettiest place I ever saw in my life, he said;
but, hang it all, Sey, I _won't_ be imposed upon.

So he made up his mind, it being now December, to return to London.
We met the Count next day, and stopped his carriage, and told him
so. Charles thought this would have the immediate effect of bringing
the man to reason. But he only lifted his hat, with the blackcock's
feather, and smiled a bland smile. The Archduke Karl is inquiring
about it, he answered, and drove on without parley.

Charles used some strong words, which I will not transcribe (I am a
family man), and returned to England.

For the next two months we heard little from Amelia save her regret
that the Count wouldn't sell us Schloss Lebenstein. Its pinnacles
had fairly pierced her heart. Strange to say, she was absolutely
infatuated about the castle. She rather wanted the place while
she was there, and thought she could get it; now she thought
she couldn't, her soul (if she has one) was wildly set upon it.
Moreover, Césarine further inflamed her desire by gently hinting
a fact which she had picked up at the courier's table d'hôte at
the hotel--that the Count had been far from anxious to sell his
ancestral and historical estate to a South African diamond king.
He thought the honour of the family demanded, at least, that he
should secure a wealthy buyer of good ancient lineage.

One morning in February, however, Amelia returned from the Row all
smiles and tremors. (She had been ordered horse-exercise to correct
the increasing excessiveness of her figure.)

Who do you think I saw riding in the Park she inquired. Why,
the Count of Lebenstein.

No! Charles exclaimed, incredulous.

Yes, Amelia answered.

Must be mistaken, Charles cried.

But Amelia stuck to it. More than that, she sent out emissaries to
inquire diligently from the London lawyers, whose name had been
mentioned to us by the ancestral firm in Unter den Lauben as
their English agents, as to the whereabouts of our friend; and
her emissaries learned in effect that the Count was in town and
stopping at Morley's.

I see through it, Charles exclaimed. He finds he's made a
mistake; and now he's come over here to reopen negotiations.

I was all for waiting prudently till the Count made the first move.
Don't let him see your eagerness, I said. But Amelia's ardour
could not now be restrained. She insisted that Charles should
call on the Graf as a mere return of his politeness in the Tyrol.

He was as charming as ever. He talked to us with delight about the
quaintness of London. He would be ravished to dine next evening with
Sir Charles. He desired his respectful salutations meanwhile to
Miladi Vandrift and Madame Ventvorth.

He dined with us, almost en famille. Amelia's cook did wonders. In
the billiard-room, about midnight, Charles reopened the subject.
The Count was really touched. It pleased him that still, amid the
distractions of the City of Five Million Souls, we should remember
with affection his beloved Lebenstein.

Come to my lawyers, he said, to-morrow, and I will talk it all
over with you.

We went--a most respectable firm in Southampton Row; old family
solicitors. They had done business for years for the late Count, who
had inherited from his grandmother estates in Ireland; and they were
glad to be honoured with the confidence of his successor. Glad, too,
to make the acquaintance of a prince of finance like Sir Charles
Vandrift. Anxious (rubbing their hands) to arrange matters
satisfactorily all round for everybody. (Two capital families with
which to be mixed up, you see.)

Sir Charles named a price, and referred them to his solicitors.
The Count named a higher, but still a little come-down, and left
the matter to be settled between the lawyers. He was a soldier and
a gentleman, he said, with a Tyrolese toss of his high-born head;
he would abandon details to men of business.

As I was really anxious to oblige Amelia, I met the Count
accidentally next day on the steps of Morley's. (Accidentally,
that is to say, so far as he was concerned, though I had been
hanging about in Trafalgar Square for half an hour to see him.)
I explained, in guarded terms, that I had a great deal of influence
in my way with Sir Charles; and that a word from me-- I broke
off. He stared at me blankly.

Commission he inquired, at last, with a queer little smile.

Well, not exactly commission, I answered, wincing. Still, a
friendly word, you know. One good turn deserves another.

He looked at me from head to foot with a curious scrutiny. For one
moment I feared the Tyrolese nobleman in him was going to raise its
foot and take active measures. But the next, I saw that Sir Charles
was right after all, and that pristine innocence has removed from
this planet to other quarters.

He named his lowest price. M. Ventvorth, he said, I am a Tyrolese
seigneur; I do not dabble, myself, in commissions and percentages.
But if your influence with Sir Charles--we understand each other, do
we not--as between gentlemen--a little friendly present--no money,
of course--but the equivalent of say 5 per cent in jewellery, on
whatever sum above his bid to-day you induce him to
offer--eh--c'est convenu

Ten per cent is more usual, I murmured.

He was the Austrian hussar again. Five, monsieur--or nothing!

I bowed and withdrew. Well, five then, I answered, just to oblige
your Serenity.

A secretary, after all, can do a great deal. When it came to the
scratch, I had but little difficulty in persuading Sir Charles, with
Amelia's aid, backed up on either side by Isabel and Césarine, to
accede to the Count's more reasonable proposal. The Southampton Row
people had possession of certain facts as to the value of the wines
in the Bordeaux market which clinched the matter. In a week or two
all was settled; Charles and I met the Count by appointment in
Southampton Row, and saw him sign, seal, and deliver the title-deeds
of Schloss Lebenstein. My brother-in-law paid the purchase-money
into the Count's own hands, by cheque, crossed on a first-class
London firm where the Count kept an account to his high well-born
order. Then he went away with the proud knowledge that he was owner
of Schloss Lebenstein. And what to me was more important still,
I received next morning by post a cheque for the five per cent,
unfortunately drawn, by some misapprehension, to my order on the
self-same bankers, and with the Count's signature. He explained in
the accompanying note that the matter being now quite satisfactorily
concluded, he saw no reason of delicacy why the amount he had
promised should not be paid to me forthwith direct in money.

I cashed the cheque at once, and said nothing about the affair, not
even to Isabel. My experience is that women are not to be trusted
with intricate matters of commission and brokerage.

Though it was now late in March, and the House was sitting, Charles
insisted that we must all run over at once to take possession of our
magnificent Tyrolese castle. Amelia was almost equally burning with
eagerness. She gave herself the airs of a Countess already. We took
the Orient Express as far as Munich; then the Brenner to Meran,
and put up for the night at the Erzherzog Johann. Though we had
telegraphed our arrival, and expected some fuss, there was no
demonstration. Next morning we drove out in state to the schloss,
to enter into enjoyment of our vines and fig-trees.

We were met at the door by the surly steward. I shall dismiss
that man, Charles muttered, as Lord of Lebenstein. He's too
sour-looking for my taste. Never saw such a brute. Not a smile
of welcome!

He mounted the steps. The surly man stepped forward and murmured a
few morose words in German. Charles brushed him aside and strode on.
Then there followed a curious scene of mutual misunderstanding. The
surly man called lustily for his servants to eject us. It was some
time before we began to catch at the truth. The surly man was the
_real_ Graf von Lebenstein.

And the Count with the moustache It dawned upon us now. Colonel
Clay again! More audacious than ever!

Bit by bit it all came out. He had ridden behind us the first day
we viewed the place, and, giving himself out to the servants as
one of our party, had joined us in the reception-room. We asked
the real Count why he had spoken to the intruder. The Count
explained in French that the man with the moustache had introduced
my brother-in-law as the great South African millionaire, while he
described himself as our courier and interpreter. As such he had
had frequent interviews with the real Graf and his lawyers in
Meran, and had driven almost daily across to the castle. The owner
of the estate had named one price from the first, and had stuck to
it manfully. He stuck to it still; and if Sir Charles chose to buy
Schloss Lebenstein over again he was welcome to have it. How the
London lawyers had been duped the Count had not really the slightest
idea. He regretted the incident, and (coldly) wished us a very good
morning.

There was nothing for it but to return as best we might to the
Erzherzog Johann, crestfallen, and telegraph particulars to the
police in London.

Charles and I ran across post-haste to England to track down the
villain. At Southampton Row we found the legal firm by no means
penitent; on the contrary, they were indignant at the way we had
deceived them. An impostor had written to them on Lebenstein
paper from Meran to say that he was coming to London to negotiate
the sale of the schloss and surrounding property with the
famous millionaire, Sir Charles Vandrift; and Sir Charles had
demonstratively recognised him at sight as the real Count von
Lebenstein. The firm had never seen the present Graf at all, and
had swallowed the impostor whole, so to speak, on the strength of
Sir Charles's obvious recognition. He had brought over as documents
some most excellent forgeries--facsimiles of the originals--which,
as our courier and interpreter, he had every opportunity of
examining and inspecting at the Meran lawyers'. It was a deeply-laid
plot, and it had succeeded to a marvel. Yet, all of it depended
upon the one small fact that we had accepted the man with the long
moustache in the hall of the schloss as the Count von Lebenstein on
his own representation.

He held our cards in his hands when he came in; and the servant had
_not_ given them to him, but to the genuine Count. That was the one
unsolved mystery in the whole adventure.

By the evening's post two letters arrived for us at Sir Charles's
house one for myself, and one for my employer. Sir Charles's ran
thus--


HIGH WELL-BORN INCOMPETENCE,--

I only just pulled through! A very small slip nearly lost me
everything. I believed you were going to Schloss Planta that day,
not to Schloss Lebenstein. You changed your mind en route. That
might have spoiled all. Happily I perceived it, rode up by the short
cut, and arrived somewhat hurriedly and hotly at the gate before
you. Then I introduced myself. I had one more bad moment when the
rival claimant to my name and title intruded into the room. But
fortune favours the brave your utter ignorance of German saved me.
The rest was pap. It went by itself almost.

Allow me, now, as some small return for your various welcome
cheques, to offer you a useful and valuable present--a German
dictionary, grammar, and phrase-book!

I kiss your hand.

No longer

VON LEBENSTEIN.


The other note was to me. It was as follows--


DEAR GOOD MR. VENTVORTH,--

Ha, ha, ha; just a W misplaced sufficed to take you in, then! And
I risked the TH, though anybody with a head on his shoulders would
surely have known our TH is by far more difficult than our W for
foreigners! However, all's well that ends well; and now I've got
you. The Lord has delivered you into my hands, dear friend--on your
own initiative. I hold my cheque, endorsed by you, and cashed at my
banker's, as a hostage, so to speak, for your future good behaviour.
If ever you recognise me, and betray me to that solemn old ass, your
employer, remember, I expose it, and you with it to him. So now we
understand each other. I had not thought of this little dodge; it
was you who suggested it. However, I jumped at it. Was it not well
worth my while paying you that slight commission in return for a
guarantee of your future silence Your mouth is now closed. And
cheap too at the price.--Yours, dear Comrade, in the great
confraternity of rogues,

CUTHBERT CLAY, Colonel.


Charles laid his note down, and grizzled. What's yours, Sey
he asked.

From a lady, I answered.

He gazed at me suspiciously. Oh, I thought it was the same hand,
he said. His eye looked through me.

No, I answered. Mrs. Mortimer's. But I confess I trembled.

He paused a moment. You made all inquiries at this fellow's bank
he went on, after a deep sigh.

Oh, yes, I put in quickly. (I had taken good care about that,
you may be sure, lest he should spot the commission.) They say
the self-styled Count von Lebenstein was introduced to them by
the Southampton Row folks, and drew, as usual, on the Lebenstein
account so they were quite unsuspicious. A rascal who goes about
the world on that scale, you know, and arrives with such credentials
as theirs and yours, naturally imposes on anybody. The bank didn't
even require to have him formally identified. The firm was enough.
He came to pay money in, not to draw it out. And he withdrew his
balance just two days later, saying he was in a hurry to get back
to Vienna.

Would he ask for items I confess I felt it was an awkward moment.
Charles, however, was too full of regrets to bother about the
account. He leaned back in his easy chair, stuck his hands in his
pockets, held his legs straight out on the fender before him, and
looked the very picture of hopeless despondency.

Sey, he began, after a minute or two, poking the fire,
reflectively, what a genius that man has! 'Pon my soul, I
admire him. I sometimes wish-- He broke off and hesitated.

Yes, Charles I answered.

I sometimes wish ... we had got him on the Board of the Cloetedorp
Golcondas. Mag--nificent combinations he would make in the City!

I rose from my seat and stared solemnly at my misguided
brother-in-law.

Charles, I said, you are beside yourself. Too much Colonel Clay
has told upon your clear and splendid intellect. There are certain
remarks which, however true they may be, no self-respecting
financier should permit himself to make, even in the privacy of
his own room, to his most intimate friend and trusted adviser.

Charles fairly broke down. You are right, Sey, he sobbed out.
Quite right. Forgive this outburst. At moments of emotion the
truth will sometimes out, in spite of everything.

I respected his feebleness. I did not even make it a fitting
occasion to ask for a trifling increase of salary.



V

THE EPISODE OF THE DRAWN GAME


The twelfth of August saw us, as usual, at Seldon Castle,
Ross-shire. It is part of Charles's restless, roving temperament
that, on the morning of the eleventh, wet or fine, he must set out
from London, whether the House is sitting or not, in defiance of
the most urgent three-line whips; and at dawn on the twelfth he must
be at work on his moors, shooting down the young birds with might
and main, at the earliest possible legal moment.

He goes on like Saul, slaying his thousands, or, like David, his
tens of thousands, with all the guns in the house to help him, till
the keepers warn him he has killed as many grouse as they consider
desirable; and then, having done his duty, as he thinks, in this
respect, he retires precipitately with flying colours to Brighton,
Nice, Monte Carlo, or elsewhere. He must be always on the trek;
when he is buried, I believe he will not be able to rest quiet in
his grave his ghost will walk the world to terrify old ladies.

At Seldon, at least, he said to me, with a sigh, as he stepped
into his Pullman, I shall be safe from that impostor!

And indeed, as soon as he had begun to tire a little of counting
up his hundreds of brace per diem, he found a trifling piece of
financial work cut ready to his hand, which amply distracted his
mind for the moment from Colonel Clay, his accomplices, and his
villainies.

Sir Charles, I ought to say, had secured during that summer a very
advantageous option in a part of Africa on the Transvaal frontier,
rumoured to be auriferous. Now, whether it was auriferous or not
before, the mere fact that Charles had secured some claim on it
naturally made it so; for no man had ever the genuine Midas-touch
to a greater degree than Charles Vandrift whatever he handles turns
at once to gold, if not to diamonds. Therefore, as soon as my
brother-in-law had obtained this option from the native vendor (a
most respected chief, by name Montsioa), and promoted a company
of his own to develop it, his great rival in that region, Lord
Craig-Ellachie (formerly Sir David Alexander Granton), immediately
secured a similar option of an adjacent track, the larger part of
which had pretty much the same geological conditions as that covered
by Sir Charles's right of pre-emption.

We were not wholly disappointed, as it turned out, in the result.
A month or two later, while we were still at Seldon, we received
a long and encouraging letter from our prospectors on the spot,
who had been hunting over the ground in search of gold-reefs. They
reported that they had found a good auriferous vein in a corner of
the tract, approachable by adit-levels; but, unfortunately, only a
few yards of the lode lay within the limits of Sir Charles's area.
The remainder ran on at once into what was locally known as
Craig-Ellachie's section.

However, our prospectors had been canny, they said; though young
Mr. Granton was prospecting at the same time, in the self-same
ridge, not very far from them, his miners had failed to discover
the auriferous quartz; so our men had held their tongues about it,
wisely leaving it for Charles to govern himself accordingly.

Can you dispute the boundary I asked.

Impossible, Charles answered. You see, the limit is a meridian
of longitude. There's no getting over that. Can't pretend to deny
it. No buying over the sun! No bribing the instruments! Besides,
we drew the line ourselves. We've only one way out of it, Sey.
Amalgamate! Amalgamate!

Charles is a marvellous man! The very voice in which he murmured
that blessed word Amalgamate! was in itself a poem.

Capital! I answered. Say nothing about it, and join forces with
Craig-Ellachie.

Charles closed one eye pensively.

That very same evening came a telegram in cipher from our chief
engineer on the territory of the option Young Granton has somehow
given us the slip and gone home. We suspect he knows all. But we
have not divulged the secret to anybody.

Seymour, my brother-in-law said impressively, there is no time to
be lost. I must write this evening to Sir David--I mean to My Lord.
Do you happen to know where he is stopping at present

The Morning Post announced two or three days ago that he was at
Glen-Ellachie, I answered.

Then I'll ask him to come over and thrash the matter out with me,
my brother-in-law went on. A very rich reef, they say. I must have
my finger in it!

We adjourned into the study, where Sir Charles drafted, I must
admit, a most judicious letter to the rival capitalist. He pointed
out that the mineral resources of the country were probably great,
but as yet uncertain. That the expense of crushing and milling might
be almost prohibitive. That access to fuel was costly, and its
conveyance difficult. That water was scarce, and commanded by our
section. That two rival companies, if they happened to hit upon ore,
might cut one another's throats by erecting two sets of furnaces or
pumping plants, and bringing two separate streams to the spot,
where one would answer. In short--to employ the golden word--that
amalgamation might prove better in the end than competition; and
that he advised, at least, a conference on the subject.

I wrote it out fair for him, and Sir Charles, with the air of a
Cromwell, signed it.

This is important, Sey, he said. It had better be registered,
for fear of falling into improper hands. Don't give it to Dobson;
let Césarine take it over to Fowlis in the dog-cart.

It is the drawback of Seldon that we are twelve miles from a
railway station, though we look out on one of the loveliest firths
in Scotland.

Césarine took it as directed--an invaluable servant, that girl!
Meanwhile, we learned from the Morning Post next day that young
Mr. Granton had stolen a march upon us. He had arrived from Africa
by the same mail with our agent's letter, and had joined his father
at once at Glen-Ellachie.

Two days later we received a most polite reply from the opposing
interest. It ran after this fashion--


CRAIG-ELLACHIE LODGE,

GLEN-ELLACHIE, INVERNESS-SHIRE.

DEAR SIR CHARLES VANDRIFT--Thanks for yours of the 20th. In reply,
I can only say I fully reciprocate your amiable desire that nothing
adverse to either of our companies should happen in South Africa.
With regard to your suggestion that we should meet in person, to
discuss the basis of a possible amalgamation, I can only say my
house is at present full of guests--as is doubtless your own--and
I should therefore find it practically impossible to leave
Glen-Ellachie. Fortunately, however, my son David is now at home
on a brief holiday from Kimberley; and it will give him great
pleasure to come over and hear what you have to say in favour of an
arrangement which certainly, on some grounds, seems to me desirable
in the interests of both our concessions alike. He will arrive
to-morrow afternoon at Seldon, and he is authorised, in every
respect, to negotiate with full powers on behalf of myself and the
other directors. With kindest regards to your wife and sons, I
remain, dear Sir Charles, yours faithfully,

CRAIG-ELLACHIE.


Cunning old fox! Sir Charles exclaimed, with a sniff. What's he
up to now, I wonder Seems almost as anxious to amalgamate as we
ourselves are, Sey. A sudden thought struck him. Do you know,
he cried, looking up, I really believe the same thing must have
happened to _both_ our exploring parties. _They_ must have found a
reef that goes under _our_ ground, and the wicked old rascal wants
to cheat us out of it!

As we want to cheat him, I ventured to interpose.

Charles looked at me fixedly. Well, if so, we're both in luck,
he murmured, after a pause; though _we_ can only get to know the
whereabouts of _their_ find by joining hands with them and showing
them ours. Still, it's good business either way. But I shall be
cautious--cautious.

What a nuisance! Amelia cried, when we told her of the incident.
I suppose I shall have to put the man up for the night--a nasty,
raw-boned, half-baked Scotchman, you may be certain.

On Wednesday afternoon, about three, young Granton arrived. He was
a pleasant-featured, red-haired, sandy-whiskered youth, not unlike
his father; but, strange to say, he dropped in to call, instead of
bringing his luggage.

Why, you're not going back to Glen-Ellachie to-night, surely
Charles exclaimed, in amazement. Lady Vandrift will be _so_
disappointed! Besides, this business can't be arranged between
two trains, do you think, Mr. Granton

Young Granton smiled. He had an agreeable smile--canny, yet open.

Oh no, he said frankly. I didn't mean to go back. I've put up at
the inn. I have my wife with me, you know--and, I wasn't invited.

Amelia was of opinion, when we told her this episode, that David
Granton wouldn't stop at Seldon because he was an Honourable.
Isabel was of opinion he wouldn't stop because he had married an
unpresentable young woman somewhere out in South Africa. Charles was
of opinion that, as representative of the hostile interest, he put
up at the inn, because it might tie his hands in some way to be the
guest of the chairman of the rival company. And _I_ was of opinion
that he had heard of the castle, and knew it well by report as the
dullest country-house to stay at in Scotland.

However that may be, young Granton insisted on remaining at the
Cromarty Arms, though he told us his wife would be delighted to
receive a call from Lady Vandrift and Mrs. Wentworth. So we all
returned with him to bring the Honourable Mrs. Granton up to tea
at the Castle.

She was a nice little thing, very shy and timid, but by no means
unpresentable, and an evident lady. She giggled at the end of every
sentence; and she was endowed with a slight squint, which somehow
seemed to point all her feeble sallies. She knew little outside
South Africa; but of that she talked prettily; and she won all
our hearts, in spite of the cast in her eye, by her unaffected
simplicity.

Next morning Charles and I had a regular debate with young Granton
about the rival options. Our talk was of cyanide processes,
reverberatories, pennyweights, water-jackets. But it dawned upon us
soon that, in spite of his red hair and his innocent manners, our
friend, the Honourable David Granton, knew a thing or two. Gradually
and gracefully he let us see that Lord Craig-Ellachie had sent him
for the benefit of the company, but that _he_ had come for the
benefit of the Honourable David Granton.

I'm a younger son, Sir Charles, he said; and therefore I have to
feather my nest for myself. I know the ground. My father will be
guided implicitly by what I advise in the matter. We are men of the
world. Now, let's be business-like. _You_ want to amalgamate. You
wouldn't do that, of course, if you didn't know of something to the
advantage of my father's company--say, a lode on our land--which you
hope to secure for yourself by amalgamation. Very well; _I_ can make
or mar your project. If you choose to render it worth my while, I'll
induce my father and his directors to amalgamate. If you don't, I
won't. That's the long and the short of it!

Charles looked at him admiringly.

Young man, he said, you're deep, very deep--for your age. Is this
candour--or deception Do you mean what you say Or do you know some
reason why it suits your father's book to amalgamate as well as it
suits mine And are you trying to keep it from me He fingered his
chin. If I only knew that, he went on, I should know how to deal
with you.

Young Granton smiled again. You're a financier, Sir Charles, he
answered. I wonder, at your time of life, you should pause to ask
another financier whether he's trying to fill his own pocket--or his
father's. Whatever is my father's goes to his eldest son--and _I_ am
his youngest.

You are right as to general principles, Sir Charles replied, quite
affectionately. Most sound and sensible. But how do I know you
haven't bargained already in the same way with your father You
may have settled with _him_, and be trying to diddle me.

The young man assumed a most candid air. Look here, he said,
leaning forward. I offer you this chance. Take it or leave it. _Do_
you wish to purchase my aid for this amalgamation by a moderate
commission on the net value of my father's option to yourself--which
I know approximately

Say five per cent, I suggested, in a tentative voice, just to
justify my presence.

He looked me through and through. _Ten_ is more usual, he
answered, in a peculiar tone and with a peculiar glance.

Great heavens, how I winced! I knew what his words meant. They were
the very words I had said myself to Colonel Clay, as the Count von
Lebenstein, about the purchase-money of the schloss--and in the very
same accent. I saw through it all now. That beastly cheque! This
was Colonel Clay; and he was trying to buy up my silence and
assistance by the threat of exposure!

My blood ran cold. I didn't know how to answer him. What happened
at the rest of that interview I really couldn't tell you. My brain
reeled round. I heard just faint echoes of fuel and reduction
works. What on earth was I to do If I told Charles my
suspicion--for it was only a suspicion--the fellow might turn upon
me and disclose the cheque, which would suffice to ruin me. If I
didn't, I ran a risk of being considered by Charles an accomplice
and a confederate.

The interview was long. I hardly know how I struggled through it.
At the end young Granton went off, well satisfied, if it was young
Granton; and Amelia invited him and his wife up to dinner at the
castle.

Whatever else they were, they were capital company. They stopped
for three days more at the Cromarty Arms. And Charles debated and
discussed incessantly. He couldn't quite make up his mind what to
do in the affair; and _I_ certainly couldn't help him. I never was
placed in such a fix in my life. I did my best to preserve a strict
neutrality.

Young Granton, it turned out, was a most agreeable person; and so,
in her way, was that timid, unpretending South African wife of his.
She was naively surprised Amelia had never met her mamma at Durban.
They both talked delightfully, and had lots of good stories--mostly
with points that told against the Craig-Ellachie people. Moreover,
the Honourable David was a splendid swimmer. He went out in a boat
with us, and dived like a seal. He was burning to teach Charles
and myself to swim, when we told him we could neither of us take a
single stroke; he said it was an accomplishment incumbent upon every
true Englishman. But Charles hates the water; while, as for myself,
I detest every known form of muscular exercise.

However, we consented that he should row us on the Firth, and made
an appointment one day with himself and his wife for four the next
evening.

That night Charles came to me with a very grave face in my own
bedroom. Sey, he said, under his breath, have you observed
Have you watched Have you any suspicions

I trembled violently. I felt all was up. Suspicions of whom
I asked. Not surely of Simpson (he was Sir Charles's valet).

My respected brother-in-law looked at me contemptuously.

Sey, he said, are you trying to take me in No, _not_ of Simpson
of these two young folks. My own belief is--they're Colonel Clay
and Madame Picardet.

Impossible! I cried.

He nodded. I'm sure of it.

How do you know

Instinctively.

I seized his arm. Charles, I said, imploring him, do nothing
rash. Remember how you exposed yourself to the ridicule of fools
over Dr. Polperro!

I've thought of that, he answered, and I mean to ca' caller.
(When in Scotland as laird of Seldon, Charles loves both to dress
and to speak the part thoroughly.) First thing to-morrow I shall
telegraph over to inquire at Glen-Ellachie; I shall find out
whether this is really young Granton or not; meanwhile, I shall keep
my eye close upon the fellow.

Early next morning, accordingly, a groom was dispatched with a
telegram to Lord Craig-Ellachie. He was to ride over to Fowlis, send
it off at once, and wait for the answer. At the same time, as it was
probable Lord Craig-Ellachie would have started for the moors before
the telegram reached the Lodge, I did not myself expect to see the
reply arrive much before seven or eight that evening. Meanwhile, as
it was far from certain we had not the real David Granton to deal
with, it was necessary to be polite to our friendly rivals. Our
experience in the Polperro incident had shown us both that too much
zeal may be more dangerous than too little. Nevertheless, taught
by previous misfortunes, we kept watching our man pretty close,
determined that on this occasion, at least, he should neither do us
nor yet escape us.

About four o'clock the red-haired young man and his pretty little
wife came up to call for us. She looked so charming and squinted
so enchantingly, one could hardly believe she was not as simple
and innocent as she seemed to be. She tripped down to the Seldon
boat-house, with Charles by her side, giggling and squinting her
best, and then helped her husband to get the skiff ready. As she did
so, Charles sidled up to me. Sey, he whispered, I'm an old hand,
and I'm not readily taken in. I've been talking to that girl, and
upon my soul I think she's all right. She's a charming little lady.
We may be mistaken after all, of course, about young Granton. In any
case, it's well for the present to be courteous. A most important
option! If it's really he, we must do nothing to annoy him or let
him see we suspect him.

I had noticed, indeed, that Mrs. Granton had made herself most
agreeable to Charles from the very beginning. And as to one thing he
was right. In her timid, shrinking way she was undeniably charming.
That cast in her eye was all pure piquancy.

We rowed out on to the Firth, or, to be more strictly correct, the
two Grantons rowed while Charles and I sat and leaned back in the
stern on the luxurious cushions. They rowed fast and well. In a very
few minutes they had rounded the point and got clear out of sight
of the Cockneyfied towers and false battlements of Seldon.

Mrs. Granton pulled stroke. Even as she rowed she kept up a brisk
undercurrent of timid chaff with Sir Charles, giggling all the
while, half forward, half shy, like a school-girl who flirts with
a man old enough to be her grandfather.

Sir Charles was flattered. He is susceptible to the pleasures of
female attention, especially from the young, the simple, and the
innocent. The wiles of women of the world he knows too well; but a
pretty little ingénue can twist him round her finger. They rowed on
and on, till they drew abreast of Seamew's island. It is a jagged
stack or skerry, well out to sea, very wild and precipitous on the
landward side, but shelving gently outward; perhaps an acre in
extent, with steep gray cliffs, covered at that time with crimson
masses of red valerian. Mrs. Granton rowed up close to it. Oh, what
lovely flowers! she cried, throwing her head back and gazing at
them. I wish I could get some! Let's land here and pick them. Sir
Charles, you shall gather me a nice bunch for my sitting-room.

Charles rose to it innocently, like a trout to a fly.

By all means, my dear child, I--I have a passion for flowers;
which was a flower of speech itself, but it served its purpose.

They rowed us round to the far side, where is the easiest
landing-place. It struck me as odd at the moment that they seemed
to know it. Then young Granton jumped lightly ashore; Mrs. Granton
skipped after him. I confess it made me feel rather ashamed to see
how clumsily Charles and I followed them, treading gingerly on the
thwarts for fear of upsetting the boat, while the artless young
thing just flew over the gunwale. So like White Heather! However,
we got ashore at last in safety, and began to climb the rocks as
well as we were able in search of the valerian.

Judge of our astonishment when next moment those two young people
bounded back into the boat, pushed off with a peal of merry
laughter, and left us there staring at them!

They rowed away, about twenty yards, into deep water. Then the man
turned, and waved his hand at us gracefully. Good-bye! he said,
good-bye! Hope you'll pick a nice bunch! We're off to London!

Off! Charles exclaimed, turning pale. Off! What do you mean
You don't surely mean to say you're going to leave us here

The young man raised his cap with perfect politeness, while Mrs.
Granton smiled, nodded, and kissed her pretty hand to us. Yes,
he answered; for the present. We retire from the game. The fact
of it is, it's a trifle too thin this is a coup manqué.

A _what_ Charles exclaimed, perspiring visibly.

A coup manqué, the young man replied, with a compassionate smile.
A failure, don't you know; a bad shot; a fiasco. I learn from
my scouts that you sent a telegram by special messenger to Lord
Craig-Ellachie this morning. That shows you suspect me. Now, it is a
principle of my system never to go on for one move with a game when
I find myself suspected. The slightest symptom of distrust, and--I
back out immediately. My plans can only be worked to satisfaction
when there is perfect confidence on the part of my patient. It is
a well-known rule of the medical profession. I _never_ try to bleed
a man who struggles. So now we're off. Ta-ta! Good luck to you!

He was not much more than twenty yards away, and could talk to us
quite easily. But the water was deep; the islet rose sheer from I'm
sure I don't know how many fathoms of sea; and we could neither of
us swim. Charles stretched out his arms imploringly. For Heaven's
sake, he cried, don't tell me you really mean to leave us here.

He looked so comical in his distress and terror that Mrs.
Granton--Madame Picardet--whatever I am to call her--laughed
melodiously in her prettiest way at the sight of him. Dear Sir
Charles, she called out, pray don't be afraid! It's only a
short and temporary imprisonment. We will send men to take you off.
Dear David and I only need just time enough to get well ashore and
make--oh!--a few slight alterations in our personal appearance.
And she indicated with her hand, laughing, dear David's red wig and
false sandy whiskers, as we felt convinced they must be now. She
looked at them and tittered. Her manner at this moment was anything
but shy. In fact, I will venture to say, it was that of a bold and
brazen-faced hoyden.

Then you _are_ Colonel Clay! Sir Charles cried, mopping his brow
with his handkerchief.

If you choose to call me so, the young man answered politely. I'm
sure it's most kind of you to supply me with a commission in Her
Majesty's service. However, time presses, and we want to push off.
Don't alarm yourselves unnecessarily. I will send a boat to take you
away from this rock at the earliest possible moment consistent with
my personal safety and my dear companion's. He laid his hand on his
heart and struck a sentimental attitude. I have received too many
unwilling kindnesses at your hands, Sir Charles, he continued,
not to feel how wrong it would be of me to inconvenience you for
nothing. Rest assured that you shall be rescued by midnight at
latest. Fortunately, the weather just at present is warm, and I see
no chance of rain; so you will suffer, if at all, from nothing worse
than the pangs of temporary hunger.

Mrs. Granton, no longer squinting--'twas a mere trick she had
assumed--rose up in the boat and stretched out a rug to us. Catch!
she cried, in a merry voice, and flung it at us, doubled. It fell
at our feet; she was a capital thrower.

Now, you dear Sir Charles, she went on, take that to keep you
warm! You know I am really quite fond of you. You're not half a
bad old boy when one takes you the right way. You have a human side
to you. Why, I often wear that sweetly pretty brooch you gave me
at Nice, when I was Madame Picardet! And I'm sure your goodness to
me at Lucerne, when I was the little curate's wife, is a thing to
remember. We're so glad to have seen you in your lovely Scotch
home you were always so proud of! _Don't_ be frightened, please. We
wouldn't hurt you for worlds. We _are_ so sorry we have to take this
inhospitable means of evading you. But dear David--I _must_ call
him dear David still--instinctively felt that you were beginning to
suspect us; and he can't bear mistrust. He _is_ so sensitive! The
moment people mistrust him, he _must_ break off with them at once.
This was the only way to get you both off our hands while we make
the needful little arrangements to depart; and we've been driven to
avail ourselves of it. However, I will give you my word of honour,
as a lady, you shall be fetched away to-night. If dear David doesn't
do it, why, I'll do it myself. And she blew another kiss to us.

Charles was half beside himself, divided between alternate terror
and anger. Oh, we shall die here! he exclaimed. Nobody'd ever
dream of coming to this rock to search for me.

What a pity you didn't let me teach you to swim! Colonel Clay
interposed. It is a noble exercise, and very useful indeed in such
special emergencies! Well, ta-ta! I'm off! You nearly scored one
this time; but, by putting you here for the moment, and keeping you
till we're gone, I venture to say I've redressed the board, and I
think we may count it a drawn game, mayn't we The match stands at
three, love--with some thousands in pocket

You're a murderer, sir! Charles shrieked out. We shall starve or
die here!

Colonel Clay on his side was all sweet reasonableness. Now, my dear
sir, he expostulated, one hand held palm outward, _Do_ you think
it probable I would kill the goose that lays the golden eggs, with
so little compunction No, no, Sir Charles Vandrift; I know too well
how much you are worth to me. I return you on my income-tax paper
as five thousand a year, clear profit of my profession. Suppose you
were to die! I might be compelled to find some new and far less
lucrative source of plunder. Your heirs, executors, or assignees
might not suit my purpose. The fact of it is, sir, your temperament
and mine are exactly adapted one to the other. _I_ understand _you_;
and _you_ do not understand _me_--which is often the basis of the
firmest friendships. I can catch you just where you are trying to
catch other people. Your very smartness assists me; for I admit you
_are_ smart. As a regular financier, I allow, I couldn't hold a
candle to you. But in my humbler walk of life I know just how to
utilise you. I lead you on, where you think you are going to gain some
advantage over others; and by dexterously playing upon your love of
a good bargain, your innate desire to best somebody else--I succeed
in besting you. There, sir, you have the philosophy of our mutual
relations.

He bowed and raised his cap. Charles looked at him and cowered. Yes,
genius as he is, he positively cowered. And do you mean to say,
he burst out, you intend to go on so bleeding me

The Colonel smiled a bland smile. Sir Charles Vandrift, he
answered, I called you just now the goose that lays the golden
eggs. You may have thought the metaphor a rude one. But you _are_
a goose, you know, in certain relations. Smartest man on the Stock
Exchange, I readily admit; easiest fool to bamboozle in the
open country that ever I met with. You fail in one thing--the
perspicacity of simplicity. For that reason, among others, I have
chosen to fasten upon you. Regard me, my dear sir, as a microbe of
millionaires, a parasite upon capitalists. You know the old rhyme

  Great fleas have little fleas upon their backs to bite 'em,
  And these again have lesser fleas, and so ad infinitum!

Well, that's just how I view myself. _You_ are a capitalist and a
millionaire. In _your_ large way you prey upon society. YOU deal in
Corners, Options, Concessions, Syndicates. You drain the world
dry of its blood and its money. You possess, like the mosquito, a
beautiful instrument of suction--Founders' Shares--with which you
absorb the surplus wealth of the community. In _my_ smaller way,
again, _I_ relieve you in turn of a portion of the plunder. I am a
Robin Hood of my age; and, looking upon _you_ as an exceptionally bad
form of millionaire--as well as an exceptionally easy form of pigeon
for a man of my type and talents to pluck--I have, so to speak,
taken up my abode upon you.

Charles looked at him and groaned.

The young man continued, in a tone of gentle badinage. I love the
plot-interest of the game, he said, and so does dear Jessie here.
We both of us adore it. As long as I find such good pickings upon
you, I certainly am not going to turn away from so valuable a
carcass, in order to batten myself, at considerable trouble, upon
minor capitalists, out of whom it is difficult to extract a few
hundreds. It may have puzzled you to guess why I fix upon you so
persistently. Now you know, and understand. When a fluke finds a
sheep that suits him, that fluke lives upon him. You are my host I
am your parasite. This coup has failed. But don't flatter yourself
for a moment it will be the last one.

Why do you insult me by telling me all this Sir Charles cried,
writhing.

The Colonel waved his hand. It was small and white. Because I _love_
the game, he answered, with a relish; and also, because the more
prepared you are beforehand, the greater credit and amusement is
there in besting you. Well, now, ta-ta once more! I am wasting
valuable time. I might be cheating somebody. I must be off at
once.... Take care of yourself, Wentworth. But I know you _will_.
You always do. Ten per cent _is_ more usual!

He rowed away and left us. As the boat began to disappear round the
corner of the island, White Heather--so she looked--stood up in the
stern and shouted aloud through her pretty hands to us. By-bye,
dear Sir Charles! she cried. Do wrap the rug around you! I'll
send the men to fetch you as soon as ever I possibly can. And thank
you so much for those lovely flowers!

The boat rounded the crags. We were alone on the island. Charles
flung himself on the bare rock in a wild access of despondency.
He is accustomed to luxury, and cannot get on without his padded
cushions. As for myself, I climbed with some difficulty to the top
of the cliff, landward, and tried to make signals of distress with
my handkerchief to some passer-by on the mainland. All in vain.
Charles had dismissed the crofters on the estate; and, as the
shooting-party that day was in an opposite direction, not a soul
was near to whom we could call for succour.

I climbed down again to Charles. The evening came on slowly. Cries
of sea-birds rang weird upon the water. Puffins and cormorants
circled round our heads in the gray of twilight. Charles suggested
that they might even swoop down upon us and bite us. They did not,
however, but their flapping wings added none the less a painful
touch of eeriness to our hunger and solitude. Charles was horribly
depressed. For myself, I will confess I felt so much relieved at
the fact that Colonel Clay had not openly betrayed me in the matter
of the commission, as to be comparatively comfortable.

We crouched on the hard crag. About eleven o'clock we heard human
voices. Boat ahoy! I shouted. An answering shout aroused us to
action. We rushed down to the landing-place and cooee'd for the men,
to show them where we were. They came up at once in Sir Charles's
own boat. They were fishermen from Niggarey, on the shore of the
Firth opposite.

A lady and gentleman had sent them, they said, to return the boat
and call for us on the island; their description corresponded to
the two supposed Grantons. They rowed us home almost in silence to
Seldon. It was half-past twelve by the gatehouse clock when we
reached the castle. Men had been sent along the coast each way to
seek us. Amelia had gone to bed, much alarmed for our safety. Isabel
was sitting up. It was too late, of course, to do much that night in
the way of apprehending the miscreants, though Charles insisted upon
dispatching a groom, with a telegram for the police at Inverness,
to Fowlis.

Nothing came of it all. A message awaited us from Lord
Craig-Ellachie, to be sure, saying that his son had not left
Glen-Ellachie Lodge; while research the next day and later showed
that our correspondent had never even received our letter. An empty
envelope alone had arrived at the house, and the postal authorities
had been engaged meanwhile, with their usual lightning speed, in
investigating the matter. Césarine had posted the letter herself
at Fowlis, and brought back the receipt; so the only conclusion we
could draw was this--Colonel Clay must be in league with somebody
at the post-office. As for Lord Craig-Ellachie's reply, that was a
simple forgery; though, oddly enough, it was written on
Glen-Ellachie paper.

However, by the time Charles had eaten a couple of grouse, and
drunk a bottle of his excellent Rudesheimer, his spirits and valour
revived exceedingly. Doubtless he inherits from his Boer ancestry a
tendency towards courage of the Batavian description. He was in
capital feather.

After all, Sey, he said, leaning back in his chair, this time
we score one. He has _not_ done us brown; we have at least detected
him. To detect him in time is half-way to catching him. Only the
remoteness of our position at Seldon Castle saved him from capture.
Next set-to, I feel sure, we will not merely spot him, we will also
nab him. I only wish he would try on such a rig in London.

But the oddest part of it all was this, that from the moment those
two people landed at Niggarey, and told the fishermen there were
some gentlemen stranded on the Seamew's island, all trace of them
vanished. At no station along the line could we gain any news of
them. Their maid had left the inn the same morning with their
luggage, and we tracked her to Inverness; but there the trail
stopped short, no spoor lay farther. It was a most singular and
insoluble mystery.

Charles lived in hopes of catching his man in London.

But for my part, I felt there was a show of reason in one last
taunt which the rascal flung back at us as the boat receded Sir
Charles Vandrift, we are a pair of rogues. The law protects _you_.
It persecutes _me_. That's all the difference.



VI

THE EPISODE OF THE GERMAN PROFESSOR


That winter in town my respected brother-in-law had little time
on his hands to bother himself about trifles like Colonel Clay.
A thunderclap burst upon him. He saw his chief interest in South
Africa threatened by a serious, an unexpected, and a crushing
danger.

Charles does a little in gold, and a little in land; but his
principal operations have always lain in the direction of diamonds.
Only once in my life, indeed, have I seen him pay the slightest
attention to poetry, and that was when I happened one day to
recite the lines--

  Full many a gem of purest ray serene
  The dark, unfathomed caves of ocean bear.

He rubbed his hands at once and murmured enthusiastically, I never
thought of that. We might get up an Atlantic Exploration Syndicate,
Limited. So attached is he to diamonds. You may gather, therefore,
what a shock it was to that gigantic brain to learn that science was
rapidly reaching a point where his favourite gems might become all
at once a mere drug in the market. Depreciation is the one bugbear
that perpetually torments Sir Charles's soul; that winter he stood
within measurable distance of so appalling a calamity.

It happened after this manner.

We were strolling along Piccadilly towards Charles's club one
afternoon--he is a prominent member of the Croesus, in Pall
Mall--when, near Burlington House, whom should we happen to knock
up against but Sir Adolphus Cordery, the famous mineralogist, and
leading spirit of the Royal Society! He nodded to us pleasantly.
Halloa, Vandrift, he cried, in his peculiarly loud and piercing
voice; you're the very man I wanted to meet to-day. Good morning,
Wentworth. Well, how about diamonds now, Sir Gorgius You'll have to
sing small. It's all up with you Midases. Heard about this marvellous
new discovery of Schleiermacher's It's calculated to make you
diamond kings squirm like an eel in a frying-pan.

I could see Charles wriggle inside his clothes. He was most
uncomfortable. That a man like Cordery should say such things, in
so loud a voice, on no matter how little foundation, openly in
Piccadilly, was enough in itself to make a sensitive barometer
such as Cloetedorp Golcondas go down a point or two.

Hush, hush! Charles said solemnly, in that awed tone of voice
which he always assumes when Money is blasphemed against. _Please_
don't talk quite so loud! All London can hear you.

Sir Adolphus ran his arm through Charles's most amicably. There's
nothing Charles hates like having his arm taken.

Come along with me to the Athenæum, he went on, in the same
stentorian voice, and I'll tell you all about it. Most interesting
discovery. Makes diamonds cheap as dirt. Calculated to supersede
South Africa altogether.

Charles allowed himself to be dragged along. There was nothing else
possible. Sir Adolphus continued, in a somewhat lower key, induced
upon him by Charles's mute look of protest. It was a disquieting
story. He told it with gleeful unction. It seems that Professor
Schleiermacher, of Jena, the greatest living authority on the
chemistry of gems, he said, had lately invented, or claimed to
have invented, a system for artificially producing diamonds, which
had yielded most surprising and unexceptionable results.

Charles's lip curled slightly. Oh, I know the sort of thing, he
said. I've heard of it before. Very inferior stones, quite small
and worthless, produced at immense cost, and even then not worth
looking at. I'm an old bird, you know, Cordery; not to be caught
with chaff. Tell me a better one!

Sir Adolphus produced a small cut gem from his pocket. How's that
for the first water he inquired, passing it across, with a broad
smile, to the sceptic. Made under my own eyes--and quite
inexpensively!

Charles examined it close, stopping short against the railings in
St. James's Square to look at it with his pocket-lens. There was no
denying the truth. It was a capital small gem of the finest quality.

Made under your own eyes he exclaimed, still incredulous. Where,
my dear sir--at Jena

The answer was a thunderbolt from a blue sky. No, here in London;
last night as ever was; before myself and Dr. Gray; and about to be
exhibited by the President himself at a meeting of Fellows of the
Royal Society.

Charles drew a long breath. This nonsense must be stopped, he said
firmly--it must be nipped in the bud. It won't do, my dear friend;
we can't have such tampering with important Interests.

How do you mean Cordery asked, astonished.

Charles gazed at him steadily. I could see by the furtive gleam in
my brother-in-law's eye he was distinctly frightened. Where _is_
the fellow he asked. Did he come himself, or send over a deputy

Here in London, Sir Adolphus replied. He's staying at my house;
and he says he'll be glad to show his experiments to anybody
scientifically interested in diamonds. We propose to have a
demonstration of the process to-night at Lancaster Gate. Will
you drop in and see it

Would he drop in and see it Drop in at such a function! Could
he possibly stop away Charles clutched the enemy's arm with a
nervous grip. Look here, Cordery, he said, quivering; this is a
question affecting very important Interests. Don't do anything rash.
Don't do anything foolish. Remember that Shares may rise or fall on
this. He said Shares in a tone of profound respect that I can
hardly even indicate. It was the crucial word in the creed of his
religion.

I should think it very probable, Sir Adolphus replied, with the
callous indifference of the mere man of science to financial
suffering.

Sir Charles was bland, but peremptory. Now, observe, he said, a
grave responsibility rests on your shoulders. The Market depends
upon you. You must not ask in any number of outsiders to witness
these experiments. Have a few mineralogists and experts, if you
like; but also take care to invite representatives of the menaced
Interests. I will come myself--I'm engaged to dine out, but I
can contract an indisposition; and I should advise you to ask
Mosenheimer, and, say, young Phipson. They would stand for the
mines, as you and the mineralogists would stand for science. Above
all, don't blab; for Heaven's sake, let there be no premature
gossip. Tell Schleiermacher not to go gassing and boasting of
his success all over London.

We are keeping the matter a profound secret, at Schleiermacher's
own request, Cordery answered, more seriously.

Which is why, Charles said, in his severest tone, you bawled it
out at the very top of your voice in Piccadilly!

However, before nightfall, everything was arranged to Charles's
satisfaction; and off we went to Lancaster Gate, with a profound
expectation that the German professor would do nothing worth seeing.

He was a remarkable-looking man, once tall, I should say, from his
long, thin build, but now bowed and bent with long devotion to study
and leaning over a crucible. His hair, prematurely white, hung down
upon his forehead, but his eye was keen and his mouth sagacious. He
shook hands cordially with the men of science, whom he seemed to
know of old, whilst he bowed somewhat distantly to the South African
interest. Then he began to talk, in very German-English, helping out
the sense now and again, where his vocabulary failed him, by waving
his rather dirty and chemical-stained hands demonstratively about
him. His nails were a sight, but his fingers, I must say, had the
delicate shape of a man's accustomed to minute manipulation. He
plunged at once into the thick of the matter, telling us briefly in
his equally thick accent that he now brobosed by his new brocess
to make for us some goot and sadisfactory tiamonds.

He brought out his apparatus, and explained--or, as he said,
eggsblained--his novel method. Tiamonds, he said, were nozzing
but pure crystalline carbon. He knew how to crystallise it--zat
was all ze secret. The men of science examined the pots and pans
carefully. Then he put in a certain number of raw materials, and
went to work with ostentatious openness. There were three distinct
processes, and he made two stones by each simultaneously. The
remarkable part of his methods, he said, was their rapidity and
their cheapness. In three-quarters of an hour (and he smiled
sardonically) he could produce a diamond worth at current prices
two hundred pounds sterling. As you shall now see me berform,
he remarked, viz zis simple abbaradus.

The materials fizzed and fumed. The Professor stirred them. An
unpleasant smell like burnt feathers pervaded the room. The
scientific men craned their necks in their eagerness, and looked
over one another; Vane-Vivian, in particular, was all attention.
After three-quarters of an hour, the Professor, still smiling, began
to empty the apparatus. He removed a large quantity of dust or
powder, which he succinctly described as by-broducts, and then
took between finger and thumb from the midst of each pan a small
white pebble, not water-worn apparently, but slightly rough and
wart-like on the surface.

From one pair of the pannikins he produced two such stones, and
held them up before us triumphantly. Zese, he said, are genuine
tiamonds, manufactured at a gost of fourteen shillings and
siggspence abiece! Then he tried the second pair. Zese, he said,
still more gleefully, are broduced at a gost of eleffen and
ninebence! Finally, he came to the third pair, which he positively
brandished before our astonished eyes. And zese, he cried,
transported, haff gost me no more zan tree and eightbence!

They were handed round for inspection. Rough and uncut as they
stood, it was, of course, impossible to judge of their value. But
one thing was certain. The men of science had been watching close at
the first, and were sure Herr Schleiermacher had not put the stones
in; they were keen at the withdrawal, and were equally sure he had
taken them honestly out of the pannikins.

I vill now disdribute zem, the Professor remarked in a casual
tone, as if diamonds were peas, looking round at the company. And
he singled out my brother-in-law. One to Sir Charles! he said,
handing it; one to Mr. Mosenheimer; one to Mr. Phibson--as
representing the tiamond interest. Zen, one each to Sir Atolphus,
to Dr. Gray, to Mr. Fane-Fiffian, as representing science. You will
haff zem cut and rebort upon zem in due gourse. We meet again at
zis blace ze day afder do-morrow.

Charles gazed at him reproachfully. The profoundest chords of his
moral nature were stirred. Professor, he said, in a voice of
solemn warning, _Are_ you aware that, _if_ you have succeeded, you
have destroyed the value of thousands of pounds' worth of precious
property

The Professor shrugged his shoulders. Fot is dat to me he
inquired, with a curious glance of contempt. I am not a financier!
I am a man of science. I seek to know; I do not seek to make a
fortune.

Shocking! Charles exclaimed. Shocking! I never before in my life
beheld so strange an instance of complete insensibility to the
claims of others!

We separated early. The men of science were coarsely jubilant. The
diamond interest exhibited a corresponding depression. If this news
were true, they foresaw a slump. Every eye grew dim. It was a
terrible business.

Charles walked homeward with the Professor. He sounded him gently as
to the sum required, should need arise, to purchase his secrecy.
Already Sir Adolphus had bound us all down to temporary silence--as
if that were necessary; but Charles wished to know how much
Schleiermacher would take to suppress his discovery. The German
was immovable.

No, no! he replied, with positive petulance. You do not
unterstant. I do not buy and sell. Zis is a chemical fact. We must
bublish it for the sake off its seoretical falue. I do not care
for wealse. I haff no time to waste in making money.

What an awful picture of a misspent life! Charles observed to me
afterwards.

And, indeed, the man seemed to care for nothing on earth but the
abstract question--not whether he could make good diamonds or not,
but whether he could or could not produce a crystalline form of
pure carbon!

On the appointed night Charles went back to Lancaster Gate, as I
could not fail to remark, with a strange air of complete and painful
preoccupation. Never before in his life had I seen him so anxious.

The diamonds were produced, with one surface of each slightly scored
by the cutters, so as to show the water. Then a curious result
disclosed itself. Strange to say, each of the three diamonds given
to the three diamond kings turned out to be a most inferior and
valueless stone; while each of the three intrusted to the care of
the scientific investigators turned out to be a fine gem of the
purest quality.

I confess it was a sufficiently suspicious conjunction. The three
representatives of the diamond interest gazed at each other with
inquiring side-glances. Then their eyes fell suddenly they avoided
one another. Had each independently substituted a weak and inferior
natural stone for Professor Schleiermacher's manufactured pebbles
It almost seemed so. For a moment, I admit, I was half inclined to
suppose it. But next second I changed my mind. Could a man of Sir
Charles Vandrift's integrity and high principle stoop for lucre's
sake to so mean an expedient--not to mention the fact that, even if
he did, and if Mosenheimer did likewise, the stones submitted to the
scientific men would have amply sufficed to establish the reality
and success of the experiments!

Still, I must say, Charles looked guiltily across at Mosenheimer,
and Mosenheimer at Phipson, while three more uncomfortable or
unhappy-faced men could hardly have been found at that precise
minute in the City of Westminster.

Then Sir Adolphus spoke--or, rather, he orated. He said, in his loud
and grating voice, we had that evening, and on a previous evening,
been present at the conception and birth of an Epoch in the History
of Science. Professor Schleiermacher was one of those men of whom
his native Saxony might well be proud; while as a Briton he must
say he regretted somewhat that this discovery, like so many
others, should have been Made in Germany. However, Professor
Schleiermacher was a specimen of that noble type of scientific men
to whom gold was merely the rare metal Au, and diamonds merely the
element C in the scarcest of its manifold allotropic embodiments.
The Professor did not seek to make money out of his discovery. He
rose above the sordid greed of capitalists. Content with the glory
of having traced the element C to its crystalline origin, he asked
no more than the approval of science. However, out of deference to
the wishes of those financial gentlemen who were oddly concerned in
maintaining the present price of C in its crystalline form--in other
words, the diamond interest--they had arranged that the secret
should be strictly guarded and kept for the present; not one of the
few persons admitted to the experiments would publicly divulge the
truth about them. This secrecy would be maintained till he himself,
and a small committee of the Royal Society, should have time to
investigate and verify for themselves the Professor's beautiful
and ingenious processes--an investigation and verification which
the learned Professor himself both desired and suggested.
(Schleiermacher nodded approval.) When that was done, if the
process stood the test, further concealment would be absolutely
futile. The price of diamonds must fall at once below that of paste,
and any protest on the part of the financial world would, of course,
be useless. The laws of Nature were superior to millionaires.
Meanwhile, in deference to the opinion of Sir Charles Vandrift,
whose acquaintance with that fascinating side of the subject nobody
could deny, they had consented to send no notices to the Press, and
to abstain from saying anything about this beautiful and simple
process in public. He dwelt with horrid gusto on that epithet
beautiful. And now, in the name of British mineralogy, he must
congratulate Professor Schleiermacher, our distinguished guest, on
his truly brilliant and crystalline contribution to our knowledge
of brilliants and of crystalline science.

Everybody applauded. It was an awkward moment. Sir Charles bit his
lip. Mosenheimer looked glum. Young Phipson dropped an expression
which I will not transcribe. (I understand this work may circulate
among families.) And after a solemn promise of death-like secrecy,
the meeting separated.

I noticed that my brother-in-law somewhat ostentatiously avoided
Mosenheimer at the door; and that Phipson jumped quickly into his
own carriage. Home! Charles cried gloomily to the coachman as we
took our seats in the brougham. And all the way to Mayfair he leaned
back in his seat, with close-set lips, never uttering a syllable.

Before he retired to rest, however, in the privacy of the
billiard-room, I ventured to ask him Charles, will you unload
Golcondas to-morrow Which, I need hardly explain, is the slang of
the Stock Exchange for getting rid of undesirable securities. It
struck me as probable that, in the event of the invention turning
out a reality, Cloetedorp A's might become unsaleable within the
next few weeks or so.

He eyed me sternly. Wentworth, he said, you're a fool! (Except
on occasions when he is _very_ angry, my respected connection
_never_ calls me Wentworth; the familiar abbreviation,
Sey--derived from Seymour--is his usual mode of address to
me in private.) _Is_ it likely I would unload, and wreck the
confidence of the public in the Cloetedorp Company at such a
moment As a director--as Chairman--would it be just or right of
me I ask you, sir, _could_ I reconcile it to my conscience

Charles, I answered, you are right. Your conduct is noble. You
will not save your own personal interests at the expense of those
who have put their trust in you. Such probity is, alas! very rare in
finance! And I sighed involuntarily; for I had lost in Liberators.

At the same time I thought to myself, _I_ am not a director. No
trust is reposed in _me_. _I_ have to think first of dear Isabel and
the baby. Before the crash comes _I_ will sell out to-morrow the
few shares I hold, through Charles's kindness, in the Cloetedorp
Golcondas.

With his marvellous business instinct, Charles seemed to divine
my thought, for he turned round to me sharply. Look here, Sey,
he remarked, in an acidulous tone, recollect, you're my
brother-in-law. You are also my secretary. The eyes of London will
be upon us to-morrow. If _you_ were to sell out, and operators got to
know of it, they'd suspect there was something up, and the company
would suffer for it. Of course, you can do what you like with your
own property. I can't interfere with _that_. I do not dictate to
you. But as Chairman of the Golcondas, I am bound to see that the
interests of widows and orphans whose All is invested with me should
not suffer at this crisis. His voice seemed to falter. Therefore,
though I don't like to threaten, he went on, I am bound to give
you warning _if_ you sell out those shares of yours, openly or
secretly, you are no longer my secretary; you receive forthwith six
months' salary in lieu of notice, and--you leave me instantly.

Very well, Charles, I answered, in a submissive voice; though I
debated with myself for a moment whether it would be best to stick
to the ready money and quit the sinking ship, or to hold fast by my
friend, and back Charles's luck against the Professor's science.
After a short, sharp struggle within my own mind, I am proud to say,
friendship and gratitude won. I felt sure that, whether diamonds
went up or down, Charles Vandrift was the sort of man who would come
to the top in the end in spite of everything. And I decided to stand
by him!

I slept little that night, however. My mind was a whirlwind. At
breakfast Charles also looked haggard and moody. He ordered the
carriage early, and drove straight into the City.

There was a block in Cheapside. Charles, impatient and nervous,
jumped out and walked. I walked beside him. Near Wood Street a man
we knew casually stopped us.

I think I ought to mention to you, he said, confidentially,
that I have it on the very best authority that Schleiermacher,
of Jena--

Thank you, Charles said, crustily, I know that tale, and--there's
not a word of truth in it.

He brushed on in haste. A yard or two farther a broker paused in
front of us.

Halloa, Sir Charles! he called out, in a bantering tone. What's
all this about diamonds Where are Cloetedorps to-day Is it
Golconda, or Queer Street

Charles drew himself up very stiff. I fail to understand you,
he answered, with dignity.

Why, you were there yourself, the man cried. Last night at Sir
Adolphus's! Oh yes, it's all over the place; Schleiermacher of Jena
has succeeded in making the most perfect diamonds--for sixpence
apiece--as good as real--and South Africa's ancient history. In less
than six weeks Kimberley, they say, will be a howling desert. Every
costermonger in Whitechapel will wear genuine Koh-i-noors for
buttons on his coat; every girl in Bermondsey will sport a rivière
like Lady Vandrift's to her favourite music-hall. There's a slump
in Golcondas. Sly, sly, I can see; but _we_ know all about it!

Charles moved on, disgusted. The man's manners were atrocious.
Near the Bank we ran up against a most respectable jobber.

Ah, Sir Charles, he said; you here Well, this is strange news,
isn't it For my part, I advise you not to take it too seriously.
Your stock will go down, of course, like lead this morning. But
it'll rise to-morrow, mark my words, and fluctuate every hour till
the discovery's proved or disproved for certain. There's a fine
time coming for operators, I feel sure. Reports this way and that.
Rumours, rumours, rumours. And nobody will know which way to believe
till Sir Adolphus has tested it.

We moved on towards the House. Black care was seated on Sir
Charles's shoulders. As we drew nearer and nearer, everybody was
discussing the one fact of the moment. The seal of secrecy had
proved more potent than publication on the housetops. Some people
told us of the exciting news in confidential whispers; some
proclaimed it aloud in vulgar exultation. The general opinion was
that Cloetedorps were doomed, and that the sooner a man cleared
out the less was he likely to lose by it.

Charles strode on like a general; but it was a Napoleon brazening
out his retreat from Moscow. His mien was resolute. He disappeared
at last into the precincts of an office, waving me back, not to
follow. After a long consultation he came out and rejoined me.

All day long the City rang with Golcondas, Golcondas. Everybody
murmured, Slump, slump in Golcondas. The brokers had more business
to do than they could manage; though, to be sure, almost every one
was a seller and no one a buyer. But Charles stood firm as a rock,
and so did his brokers. I don't want to sell, he said, doggedly.
The whole thing is trumped up. It's a mere piece of jugglery. For
my own part, I believe Professor Schleiermacher is deceived, or else
is deceiving us. In another week the bubble will have burst, and
prices will restore themselves. His brokers, Finglemores, had only
one answer to all inquiries Sir Charles has every confidence in
the stability of Golcondas, and doesn't wish to sell or to increase
the panic.

All the world said he was splendid, splendid! There he stationed
himself on 'Change like some granite stack against which the waves
roll and break themselves in vain. He took no notice of the slump,
but ostentatiously bought up a few shares here and there so as to
restore public confidence.

I would buy more, he said, freely, and make my fortune; only,
as I was one of those who happened to spend last night at Sir
Adolphus's, people might think I had helped to spread the rumour
and produce the slump, in order to buy in at panic rates for my
own advantage. A chairman, like Caesar's wife, should be above
suspicion. So I shall only buy up just enough, now and again, to
let people see I, at least, have no doubt as to the firm future
of Cloetedorps.

He went home that night, more harassed and ill than I have ever
seen him. Next day was as bad. The slump continued, with varying
episodes. Now, a rumour would surge up that Sir Adolphus had
declared the whole affair a sham, and prices would steady a little;
now, another would break out that the diamonds were actually being
put upon the market in Berlin by the cart-load, and timid old ladies
would wire down to their brokers to realise off-hand at whatever
hazard. It was an awful day. I shall never forget it.

The morning after, as if by miracle, things righted themselves of
a sudden. While we were wondering what it meant, Charles received a
telegram from Sir Adolphus Cordery--

The man is a fraud. Not Schleiermacher at all. Just had a wire
from Jena saying the Professor knows nothing about him. Sorry
unintentionally to have caused you trouble. Come round and see me.

Sorry unintentionally to have caused you trouble. Charles was
beside himself with anger. Sir Adolphus had upset the share-market
for forty-eight mortal hours, half-ruined a round dozen of wealthy
operators, convulsed the City, upheaved the House, and now--he
apologised for it as one might apologise for being late ten minutes
for dinner! Charles jumped into a hansom and rushed round to see
him. How had he dared to introduce the impostor to solid men as
Professor Schleiermacher Sir Adolphus shrugged his shoulders. The
fellow had come and introduced himself as the great Jena chemist;
he had long white hair, and a stoop in the shoulders. What reason
had _he_ for doubting his word (I reflected to myself that on much
the same grounds Charles in turn had accepted the Honourable David
Granton and Graf von Lebenstein.) Besides, what object could the
creature have for this extraordinary deception Charles knew only
too well. It was clear it was done to disturb the diamond market,
and we realised, too late, that the man who had done it was--Colonel
Clay, in another of his manifold allotropic embodiments! Charles
had had his wish, and had met his enemy once more in London!

We could see the whole plot. Colonel Clay was polymorphic, like the
element carbon! Doubtless, with his extraordinary sleight of hand,
he had substituted real diamonds for the shapeless mass that came
out of the apparatus, in the interval between handing the pebbles
round for inspection, and distributing them piecemeal to the men of
science and representatives of the diamond interest. We all watched
him closely, of course, when he opened the crucibles; but when once
we had satisfied ourselves that _something_ came out, our doubts were
set at rest, and we forgot to watch whether he distributed those
somethings or not to the recipients. Conjurers always depend upon
such momentary distractions or lapses of attention. As usual, too,
the Professor had disappeared into space the moment his trick was
once well performed. He vanished like smoke, as the Count and Seer
had vanished before, and was never again heard of.

Charles went home more angry than I have ever beheld him. I couldn't
imagine why. He seemed as deeply hipped as if he had lost his
thousands. I endeavoured to console him. After all, I said,
though Golcondas have suffered a temporary loss, it's a comfort
to think that you should have stood so firm, and not only stemmed
the tide, but also prevented yourself from losing anything at all
of your own through panic. I'm sorry, of course, for the widows
and orphans; but if Colonel Clay has rigged the market, at least
it isn't YOU who lose by it this time.

Charles withered me with a fierce scowl of undisguised contempt.
Wentworth, he said once more, you are a fool! Then he relapsed
into silence.

But you declined to sell out, I said.

He gazed at me fixedly. Is it likely, he asked at last, I would
tell _you_ if I meant to sell out or that I'd sell out openly through
Finglemore, my usual broker Why, all the world would have known,
and Golcondas would have been finished. As it is, I don't desire to
tell an ass like you exactly how much I've lost. But I _did_ sell out,
and some unknown operator bought in at once, and closed for ready
money, and has sold again this morning; and after all that has
happened, it will be impossible to track him. He didn't wait for the
account he settled up instantly. And he sold in like manner. I know
now what has been done, and how cleverly it has all been disguised
and covered; but the most I'm going to tell you to-day is just
this--it's by far the biggest haul Colonel Clay has made out of me.
He could retire on it if he liked. My one hope is, it may satisfy
him for life; but, then, no man has ever had enough of making money.

_You_ sold out! I exclaimed. _You_, the Chairman of the company!
_You_ deserted the ship! And how about your trust How about the widows
and orphans confided to you

Charles rose and faced me. Seymour Wentworth, he said, in his most
solemn voice, you have lived with me for years and had every
advantage. You have seen high finance. Yet you ask me that question!
It's my belief you will never, never understand business!



VII

THE EPISODE OF THE ARREST OF THE COLONEL


How much precisely Charles dropped over the slump in Cloetedorps
I never quite knew. But the incident left him dejected, limp, and
dispirited.

Hang it all, Sey, he said to me in the smoking-room, a few
evenings later. This Colonel Clay is enough to vex the patience of
Job--and Job had large losses, too, if I recollect aright, from the
Chaldeans and other big operators of the period.

Three thousand camels, I murmured, recalling my dear mother's
lessons; all at one fell swoop; not to mention five hundred yoke of
oxen, carried off by the Sabeans, then a leading firm of speculative
cattle-dealers!

Ah, well, Charles meditated aloud, shaking the ash from his
cheroot into a Japanese tray--fine antique bronze-work. There were
big transactions in live-stock even then! Still, Job or no Job, the
man is too much for me.

The difficulty is, I assented, you never know where to have him.

Yes, Charles mused; if he were always the same, like Horniman's
tea or a good brand of whisky, it would be easier, of course; you'd
stand some chance of spotting him. But when a man turns up smiling
every time in a different disguise, which fits him like a skin, and
always apparently with the best credentials, why, hang it all, Sey,
there's no wrestling with him anyhow.

Who could have come to us, for example, better vouched, I
acquiesced, than the Honourable David

Exactly so, Charles murmured. I invited him myself, for my own
advantage. And he arrived with all the prestige of the Glen-Ellachie
connection.

Or the Professor I went on. Introduced to us by the leading
mineralogist of England.

I had touched a sore point. Charles winced and remained silent.

Then, women again, he resumed, after a painful pause. I must meet
in society many charming women. I can't everywhere and always be on
my guard against every dear soul of them. Yet the moment I relax
my attention for one day--or even when I don't relax it--I am
bamboozled and led a dance by that arch Mme. Picardet, or that
transparently simple little minx, Mrs. Granton. She's the cleverest
girl I ever met in my life, that hussy, whatever we're to call her.
She's a different person each time; and each time, hang it all, I
lose my heart afresh to that different person.

I glanced round to make sure Amelia was well out of earshot.

No, Sey, my respected connection went on, after another long
pause, sipping his coffee pensively, I feel I must be aided in this
superhuman task by a professional unraveller of cunning disguises. I
shall go to Marvillier's to-morrow--fortunate man, Marvillier--and
ask him to supply me with a really good 'tec, who will stop in the
house and keep an eye upon every living soul that comes near me.
He shall scan each nose, each eye, each wig, each whisker. He shall
be my watchful half, my unsleeping self; it shall be his business
to suspect all living men, all breathing women. The Archbishop of
Canterbury shall not escape for a moment his watchful regard; he
will take care that royal princesses don't collar the spoons or walk
off with the jewel-cases. He must see possible Colonel Clays in the
guard of every train and the parson of every parish; he must detect
the off-chance of a Mme. Picardet in every young girl that takes tea
with Amelia, every fat old lady that comes to call upon Isabel. Yes,
I have made my mind up. I shall go to-morrow and secure such a man
at once at Marvillier's.

If you please, Sir Charles, Césarine interposed, pushing her head
through the portière, her ladyship says, will you and Mr. Wentworth
remember that she goes out with you both this evening to Lady
Carisbrooke's

Bless my soul, Charles cried, so she does! And it's now past ten!
The carriage will be at the door for us in another five minutes!

Next morning, accordingly, Charles drove round to Marvillier's. The
famous detective listened to his story with glistening eyes; then he
rubbed his hands and purred. Colonel Clay! he said; Colonel Clay!
That's a very tough customer! The police of Europe are on the
look-out for Colonel Clay. He is wanted in London, in Paris, in
Berlin. It is le Colonel Caoutchouc here, le Colonel Caoutchouc
there; till one begins to ask, at last, IS there _any_ Colonel
Caoutchouc, or is it a convenient class name invented by the Force
to cover a gang of undiscovered sharpers However, Sir Charles, we
will do our best. I will set on the track without delay the best and
cleverest detective in England.

The very man I want, Charles said. What name, Marvillier

The principal smiled. Whatever name you like, he said. He isn't
particular. Medhurst he's called at home. _We_ call him Joe. I'll
send him round to your house this afternoon for certain.

Oh no, Charles said promptly, you won't; or Colonel Clay himself
will come instead of him. I've been sold too often. No casual
strangers! I'll wait here and see him.

But he isn't in, Marvillier objected.

Charles was firm as a rock. Then send and fetch him.

In half an hour, sure enough, the detective arrived. He was an
odd-looking small man, with hair cut short and standing straight up
all over his head, like a Parisian waiter. He had quick, sharp eyes,
very much like a ferret's; his nose was depressed, his lips thin and
bloodless. A scar marked his left cheek--made by a sword-cut, he
said, when engaged one day in arresting a desperate French smuggler,
disguised as an officer of Chasseurs d'Afrique. His mien was
resolute. Altogether, a quainter or 'cuter little man it has never
yet been my lot to set eyes on. He walked in with a brisk step,
eyed Charles up and down, and then, without much formality, asked
for what he was wanted.

This is Sir Charles Vandrift, the great diamond king, Marvillier
said, introducing us.

So I see, the man answered.

Then you know me Charles asked.

I wouldn't be worth much, the detective replied, if I didn't
know everybody. And you're easy enough to know; why, every boy in
the street knows you.

Plain spoken! Charles remarked.

As you like it, sir, the man answered in a respectful tone. I
endeavour to suit my dress and behaviour on every occasion to the
taste of my employers.

Your name Charles asked, smiling.

Joseph Medhurst, at your service. What sort of work Stolen
diamonds Illicit diamond-buying

No, Charles answered, fixing him with his eye. Quite another kind
of job. You've heard of Colonel Clay

Medhurst nodded. Why, certainly, he said; and, for the first time,
I detected a lingering trace of American accent. It's my business
to know about him.

Well, I want you to catch him, Charles went on.

Medhurst drew a long breath. Isn't that rather a large order
he murmured, surprised.

Charles explained to him exactly the sort of services he required.
Medhurst promised to comply. If the man comes near you, I'll spot
him, he said, after a moment's pause. I can promise you that much.
I'll pierce any disguise. I should know in a minute whether he's
got up or not. I'm death on wigs, false moustaches, artificial
complexions. I'll engage to bring the rogue to book if I see him.
You may set your mind at rest, that, while _I'm_ about you, Colonel
Clay can do nothing without my instantly spotting him.

He'll do it, Marvillier put in. He'll do it, if he says it. He's
my very best hand. Never knew any man like him for unravelling and
unmasking the cleverest disguises.

Then he'll suit me, Charles answered, for _I_ never knew any man
like Colonel Clay for assuming and maintaining them.

It was arranged accordingly that Medhurst should take up his
residence in the house for the present, and should be described to
the servants as assistant secretary. He came that very day, with a
marvellously small portmanteau. But from the moment he arrived,
we noticed that Césarine took a violent dislike to him.

Medhurst was a most efficient detective. Charles and I told him
all we knew about the various shapes in which Colonel Clay had
materialised, and he gave us in turn many valuable criticisms and
suggestions. Why, when we began to suspect the Honourable David
Granton, had we not, as if by accident, tried to knock his red wig
off Why, when the Reverend Richard Peploe Brabazon first discussed
the question of the paste diamonds, had we not looked to see if
any of Amelia's unique gems were missing Why, when Professor
Schleiermacher made his bow to assembled science at Lancaster Gate,
had we not strictly inquired how far he was personally known
beforehand to Sir Adolphus Cordery and the other mineralogists
He supplied us also with several good hints about false hair and
make-up; such as that Schleiermacher was probably much shorter than
he looked, but by imitating a stoop with padding at his back he
had produced the illusion of a tall bent man, though in reality no
bigger than the little curate or the Graf von Lebenstein. High heels
did the rest; while the scientific keenness we noted in his face was
doubtless brought about by a trifle of wax at the end of the nose,
giving a peculiar tilt that is extremely effective. In short, I must
frankly admit, Medhurst made us feel ashamed of ourselves. Sharp as
Charles is, we realised at once he was nowhere in observation beside
the trained and experienced senses of this professional detective.

The worst of it all was, while Medhurst was with us, by some curious
fatality, Colonel Clay stopped away from us. Now and again, to be
sure, we ran up against somebody whom Medhurst suspected; but
after a short investigation (conducted, I may say, with admirable
cleverness), the spy always showed us the doubtful person was
really some innocent and well-known character, whose antecedents
and surroundings he elucidated most wonderfully. He was a perfect
marvel, too, in his faculty of suspicion. He suspected everybody. If
an old friend dropped in to talk business with Charles, we found out
afterwards that Medhurst had lain concealed all the time behind the
curtain, and had taken short-hand notes of the whole conversation,
as well as snap-shot photographs of the supposed sharper, by means
of a kodak. If a fat old lady came to call upon Amelia, Medhurst
was sure to be lurking under the ottoman in the drawing-room, and
carefully observing, with all his eyes, whether or not she was
really Mme. Picardet, padded. When Lady Tresco brought her four
plain daughters to an At Home one night, Medhurst, in evening
dress, disguised as a waiter, followed them each round the room with
obtrusive ices, to satisfy himself just how much of their complexion
was real, and how much was patent rouge and Bloom of Ninon. He
doubted whether Simpson, Sir Charles's valet, was not Colonel Clay
in plain clothes; and he had half an idea that Césarine herself was
our saucy White Heather in an alternative avatar. We pointed out
to him in vain that Simpson had often been present in the very
same room with David Granton, and that Césarine had dressed Mrs.
Brabazon's hair at Lucerne this partially satisfied him, but only
partially. He remarked that Simpson might double both parts with
somebody else unknown; and that as for Césarine, she might well
have a twin sister who took her place when she was Mme. Picardet.

Still, in spite of all his care--or because of all his care--Colonel
Clay stopped away for whole weeks together. An explanation occurred
to us. Was it possible he knew we were guarded and watched Was he
afraid of measuring swords with this trained detective

If so, how had he found it out I had an inkling, myself--but, under
all the circumstances, I did not mention it to Charles. It was clear
that Césarine intensely disliked this new addition to the Vandrift
household. She would not stop in the room where the detective was,
or show him common politeness. She spoke of him always as that
odious man, Medhurst. Could she have guessed, what none of the
other servants knew, that the man was a spy in search of the
Colonel I was inclined to believe it. And then it dawned upon me
that Césarine had known all about the diamonds and their story; that
it was Césarine who took us to see Schloss Lebenstein; that it was
Césarine who posted the letter to Lord Craig-Ellachie! If Césarine
was in league with Colonel Clay, as I was half inclined to surmise,
what more natural than her obvious dislike to the detective who was
there to catch her principal What more simple for her than to warn
her fellow-conspirator of the danger that awaited him if he
approached this man Medhurst

However, I was too much frightened by the episode of the cheque to
say anything of my nascent suspicions to Charles. I waited rather
to see how events would shape themselves.

After a while Medhurst's vigilance grew positively annoying. More
than once he came to Charles with reports and shorthand notes
distinctly distasteful to my excellent brother-in-law. The fellow
is getting to know too much about us, Charles said to me one day.
Why, Sey, he spies out everything. Would you believe it, when I had
that confidential interview with Brookfield the other day, about the
new issue of Golcondas, the man was under the easy-chair, though I
searched the room beforehand to make sure he wasn't there; and he
came to me afterwards with full notes of the conversation, to assure
me he thought Brookfield--whom I've known for ten years--was too
tall by half an inch to be one of Colonel Clay's impersonations.

Oh, but, Sir Charles, Medhurst cried, emerging suddenly from the
bookcase, you must never look upon _any one_ as above suspicion
merely because you've known him for ten years or thereabouts.
Colonel Clay may have approached you at various times under many
disguises. He may have built up this thing gradually. Besides, as to
my knowing too much, why, of course, a detective always learns many
things about his employer's family which he is not supposed to know;
but professional honour and professional etiquette, as with doctors
and lawyers, compel him to lock them up as absolute secrets in his
own bosom. You need never be afraid I will divulge one jot of them.
If I did, my occupation would be gone, and my reputation shattered.

Charles looked at him, appalled. Do you dare to say, he burst out,
you've been listening to my talk with my brother-in-law and
secretary

Why, of course, Medhurst answered. It's my business to listen,
and to suspect everybody. If you push me to say so, how do I know
Colonel Clay is not--Mr. Wentworth

Charles withered him with a look. In future, Medhurst, he said,
you must never conceal yourself in a room where I am without my
leave and knowledge.

Medhurst bowed politely. Oh, as you will, Sir Charles, he
answered; that's _quite_ at your own wish. Though how can I act
as an efficient detective, any way, if you insist upon tying my
hands like that, beforehand

Again I detected a faint American flavour.

After that rebuff, however, Medhurst seemed put upon his mettle. He
redoubled his vigilance in every direction. It's not my fault, he
said plaintively, one day, if my reputation's so good that, while
I'm near you, this rogue won't approach you. If I can't _catch_ him,
at least I keep him away from coming near you!

A few days later, however, he brought Charles some photographs.
These he produced with evident pride. The first he showed us was a
vignette of a little parson. Who's that, then he inquired, much
pleased.

We gazed at it, open-eyed. One word rose to our lips simultaneously
Brabazon!

And how's this for high he asked again, producing another--the
photograph of a gay young dog in a Tyrolese costume.

We murmured, Von Lebenstein!

_And_ this he continued, showing us the portrait of a lady with a
most fetching squint.

We answered with one voice, Little Mrs. Granton!

Medhurst was naturally proud of this excellent exploit. He replaced
them in his pocket-book with an air of just triumph.

How did you get them Charles asked.

Medhurst's look was mysterious. Sir Charles, he answered, drawing
himself up, I must ask you to trust me awhile in this matter.
Remember, there are people whom you decline to suspect. _I_ have
learned that it is always those very people who are most dangerous
to capitalists. If I were to give you the names now, you would
refuse to believe me. Therefore, I hold them over discreetly for
the moment. One thing, however, I say. I _know_ to a certainty where
Colonel Clay is at this present speaking. But I will lay my plans
deep, and I hope before long to secure him. You shall be present
when I do so; and I shall make him confess his personality openly.
More than that you cannot reasonably ask. I shall leave it to
_you_, then, whether or not you wish to arrest him.

Charles was considerably puzzled, not to say piqued, by this curious
reticence; he begged hard for names; but Medhurst was adamant. No,
no, he replied; we detectives have our own just pride in our
profession. If I told you now, you would probably spoil all by some
premature action. You are too open and impulsive! I will mention
this alone Colonel Clay will be shortly in Paris, and before long
will begin from that city a fresh attempt at defrauding you, which
he is now hatching. Mark my words, and see whether or not I have
been kept well informed of the fellow's movements!

He was perfectly correct. Two days later, as it turned out, Charles
received a confidential letter from Paris, purporting to come
from the head of a second-rate financial house with which he had
had dealings over the Craig-Ellachie Amalgamation--by this time,
I ought to have said, an accomplished union. It was a letter of
small importance in itself--a mere matter of detail; but it paved
the way, so Medhurst thought, to some later development of more
serious character. Here once more the man's singular foresight was
justified. For, in another week, we received a second communication,
containing other proposals of a delicate financial character, which
would have involved the transference of some two thousand pounds
to the head of the Parisian firm at an address given. Both these
letters Medhurst cleverly compared with those written to Charles
before, in the names of Colonel Clay and of Graf von Lebenstein.
At first sight, it is true, the differences between the two seemed
quite enormous the Paris hand was broad and black, large and bold;
while the earlier manuscript was small, neat, thin, and gentlemanly.
Still, when Medhurst pointed out to us certain persistent twists in
the formation of his capitals, and certain curious peculiarities in
the relative length of his t's, his l's, his b's, and his h's, we
could see for ourselves he was right; both were the work of one hand,
writing in the one case with a sharp-pointed nib, very small, and in
the other with a quill, very large and freely.

This discovery was _most_ important. We stood now within measurable
distance of catching Colonel Clay, and bringing forgery and fraud
home to him without hope of evasion.

To make all sure, however, Medhurst communicated with the Paris
police, and showed us their answers. Meanwhile, Charles continued to
write to the head of the firm, who had given a private address in
the Rue Jean Jacques, alleging, I must say, a most clever reason why
the negotiations at this stage should be confidentially conducted.
But one never expected from Colonel Clay anything less than
consummate cleverness. In the end, it was arranged that we three
were to go over to Paris together, that Medhurst was to undertake,
under the guise of being Sir Charles, to pay the two thousand pounds
to the pretended financier, and that Charles and I, waiting with the
police outside the door, should, at a given signal, rush in with our
forces and secure the criminal.

We went over accordingly, and spent the night at the Grand, as is
Charles's custom. The Bristol, which I prefer, he finds too quiet.
Early next morning we took a fiacre and drove to the Rue Jean
Jacques. Medhurst had arranged everything in advance with the Paris
police, three of whom, in plain clothes, were waiting at the foot
of the staircase to assist us. Charles had further provided himself
with two thousand pounds, in notes of the Bank of France, in order
that the payment might be duly made, and no doubt arise as to the
crime having been perpetrated as well as meditated--in the former
case, the penalty would be fifteen years; in the latter, three only.
He was in very high spirits. The fact that we had tracked the rascal
to earth at last, and were within an hour of apprehending him, was
in itself enough to raise his courage greatly. We found, as we
expected, that the number given in the Rue Jean Jacques was that
of an hotel, not a private residence. Medhurst went in first, and
inquired of the landlord whether our man was at home, at the same
time informing him of the nature of our errand, and giving him to
understand that if we effected the capture by his friendly aid, Sir
Charles would see that the expenses incurred on the swindler's bill
were met in full, as the price of his assistance. The landlord
bowed; he expressed his deep regret, as M. le Colonel--so we
heard him call him--was a most amiable person, much liked by the
household; but justice, of course, must have its way; and, with a
regretful sigh, he undertook to assist us.

The police remained below, but Charles and Medhurst were each
provided with a pair of handcuffs. Remembering the Polperro case,
however, we determined to use them with the greatest caution. We
would only put them on in case of violent resistance. We crept up to
the door where the miscreant was housed. Charles handed the notes in
an open envelope to Medhurst, who seized them hastily and held them
in his hands in readiness for action. We had a sign concerted.
Whenever he sneezed--which he could do in the most natural
manner--we were to open the door, rush in, and secure the criminal!

He was gone for some minutes. Charles and I waited outside in
breathless expectation. Then Medhurst sneezed. We flung the door
open at once, and burst in upon the creature.

Medhurst rose as we did so. He pointed with his finger. _This_ is
Colonel Clay! he said; keep him well in charge while I go down
to the door for the police to arrest him!

A gentlemanly man, about middle height, with a grizzled beard and a
well-assumed military aspect, rose at the same moment. The envelope
in which Charles had placed the notes lay on the table before him.
He clutched it nervously. I am at a loss, gentlemen, he said, in
an excited voice, to account for this interruption. He spoke with
a tremor, yet with all the politeness to which we were accustomed in
the little curate and the Honourable David.

No nonsense! Charles exclaimed, in his authoritative way. We know
who you are. We have found you out this time. You are Colonel Clay.
If you attempt to resist--take care--I will handcuff you!

The military gentleman gave a start. Yes, I _am_ Colonel Clay, he
answered. On what charge do you arrest me

Charles was bursting with wrath. The fellow's coolness seemed never
to desert him. You _are_ Colonel Clay! he muttered. You have the
unspeakable effrontery to stand there and admit it

Certainly, the Colonel answered, growing hot in turn. I have done
nothing to be ashamed of. What do you mean by this conduct How dare
you talk of arresting me

Charles laid his hand on the man's shoulder. Come, come, my
friend, he said. That sort of bluff won't go down with us. You
know very well on what charge I arrest you; and here are the police
to give effect to it.

He called out Entrez! The police entered the room. Charles
explained as well as he could in most doubtful Parisian what they
were next to do. The Colonel drew himself up in an indignant
attitude. He turned and addressed them in excellent French.

I am an officer in the service of her Britannic Majesty, he said.
On what ground do you venture to interfere with me, messieurs

The chief policeman explained. The Colonel turned to Charles.
_Your_ name, sir he inquired.

You know it very well, Charles answered. I am Sir Charles
Vandrift; and, in spite of your clever disguise, I can instantly
recognise you. I know your eyes and ears. I can see the same man
who cheated me at Nice, and who insulted me on the island.

_You_ Sir Charles Vandrift! the rogue cried. No, no, sir, you are
a madman! He looked round at the police. Take care what you do!
he cried. This is a raving maniac. I had business just now with Sir
Charles Vandrift, who quitted the room as these gentlemen entered.
This person is mad, and you, monsieur, I doubt not, bowing to me,
you are, of course, his keeper.

Do not let him deceive you, I cried to the police, beginning to
fear that with his usual incredible cleverness the fellow would
even now manage to slip through our fingers. Arrest him, as you
are told. _We_ will take the responsibility. Though I trembled when
I thought of that cheque he held of mine.

The chief of our three policemen came forward and laid his hand on
the culprit's shoulder. I advise you, M. le Colonel, he said, in
an official voice, to come with us quietly for the present. Before
the juge d'instruction we can enter at length into all these
questions.

The Colonel, very indignant still--and acting the part
marvellously--yielded and went along with them.

Where's Medhurst Charles inquired, glancing round as we reached
the door. I wish he had stopped with us.

You are looking for monsieur your friend the landlord inquired,
with a side bow to the Colonel. He has gone away in a fiacre. He
asked me to give this note to you.

He handed us a twisted note. Charles opened and read it. Invaluable
man! he cried. Just hear what he says, Sey 'Having secured
Colonel Clay, I am off now again on the track of Mme. Picardet.
She was lodging in the same house. She has just driven away; I know
to what place; and I am after her to arrest her. In blind haste,
MEDHURST.' That's smartness, IF you like. Though, poor little woman,
I think he might have left her.

Does a Mme. Picardet stop here I inquired of the landlord,
thinking it possible she might have assumed again the same old
alias.

He nodded assent. Oui, oui, oui, he answered. She has just driven
off, and monsieur your friend has gone posting after her.

Splendid man! Charles cried. Marvillier was quite right. He is
the prince of detectives!

We hailed a couple of fiacres, and drove off, in two detachments,
to the juge d'instruction. There Colonel Clay continued to brazen
it out, and asserted that he was an officer in the Indian Army, home
on six months' leave, and spending some weeks in Paris. He even
declared he was known at the Embassy, where he had a cousin an
attaché; and he asked that this gentleman should be sent for at once
from our Ambassador's to identify him. The juge d'instruction
insisted that this must be done; and Charles waited in very bad
humour for the foolish formality. It really seemed as if, after all,
when we had actually caught and arrested our man, he was going by
some cunning device to escape us.

After a delay of more than an hour, during which Colonel Clay
fretted and fumed quite as much as we did, the attaché arrived. To
our horror and astonishment, he proceeded to salute the prisoner
most affectionately.

Halloa, Algy! he cried, grasping his hand; what's up What do
these ruffians want with you

It began to dawn upon us, then, what Medhurst had meant by
suspecting everybody the real Colonel Clay was no common
adventurer, but a gentleman of birth and high connections!

The Colonel glared at us. This fellow declares he's Sir Charles
Vandrift, he said sulkily. Though, in fact, there are two of them.
And he accuses me of forgery, fraud, and theft, Bertie.

The attaché stared hard at us. This _is_ Sir Charles Vandrift, he
replied, after a moment. I remember hearing him make a speech once
at a City dinner. And what charge have you to prefer, Sir Charles,
against my cousin

Your cousin Charles cried. This is Colonel Clay, the notorious
sharper!

The attaché smiled a gentlemanly and superior smile. This is
Colonel Clay, he answered, of the Bengal Staff Corps.

It began to strike us there was something wrong somewhere.

But he has cheated me, all the same, Charles said--at Nice two
years ago, and many times since; and this very day he has tricked me
out of two thousand pounds in French bank-notes, which he has now
about him!

The Colonel was speechless. But the attaché laughed. What he has
done to-day I don't know, he said; but if it's as apocryphal as
what you say he did two years ago, you've a thundering bad case,
sir; for he was then in India, and I was out there, visiting him.

Where are the two thousand pounds Charles cried. Why, you've got
them in your hand! You're holding the envelope!

The Colonel produced it. This envelope, he said, was left with me
by the man with short stiff hair, who came just before you, and who
announced himself as Sir Charles Vandrift. He said he was interested
in tea in Assam, and wanted me to join the board of directors of
some bogus company. These are his papers, I believe, and he handed
them to his cousin.

Well, I'm glad the notes are safe, anyhow, Charles murmured, in a
tone of relief, beginning to smell a rat. Will you kindly return
them to me

The attaché turned out the contents of the envelope. They proved to
be prospectuses of bubble companies of the moment, of no importance.

Medhurst must have put them there, I cried, and decamped with the
cash.

Charles gave a groan of horror. And Medhurst is Colonel Clay! he
exclaimed, clapping his hand to his forehead.

I beg your pardon, sir, the Colonel interposed. I have but one
personality, and no aliases.

It took quite half an hour to explain this imbroglio. But as soon as
all was explained, in French and English, to the satisfaction of
ourselves and the juge d'instruction, the real Colonel shook hands
with us in a most forgiving way, and informed us that he had more
than once wondered, when he gave his name at shops in Paris, why
it was often received with such grave suspicion. We instructed
the police that the true culprit was Medhurst, whom they had seen
with their own eyes, and whom we urged them to pursue with all
expedition. Meanwhile, Charles and I, accompanied by the Colonel
and the attaché--to see the fun out, as they said--called at the
Bank of France for the purpose of stopping the notes immediately. It
was too late, however. They had been presented at once, and cashed
in gold, by a pleasant little lady in an American costume, who was
afterwards identified by the hotel-keeper (from our description) as
his lodger, Mme. Picardet. It was clear she had taken rooms in the
same hotel, to be near the Indian Colonel; and it was _she_ who had
received and sent the letters. As for our foe, he had vanished into
space, as always.

Two days later we received the usual insulting communication on a
sheet of Charles's own dainty note. Last time he wrote it was on
Craig-Ellachie paper this time, like the wanton lapwing, he had got
himself another crest.


MOST PERSPICACIOUS OF MILLIONAIRES!--Said I not well, as
Medhurst, that you must distrust everybody And the one man
you never dreamt of distrusting was--Medhurst. Yet see how
truthful I was! I told you I knew where Colonel Clay was
living--and I _did_ know, exactly. I promised to take you to
Colonel Clay's rooms, and to get him arrested for you--and
I kept my promise. I even exceeded your expectations; for
I gave you _two_ Colonel Clays instead of one--and you took
the wrong man--that is to say, the real one. This was a neat
little trick; but it cost me some trouble.

First, I found out there _was_ a real Colonel Clay, in the
Indian Army. I also found out he chanced to be coming home on
leave this season. I might have made more out of him, no doubt;
but I disliked annoying him, and preferred to give myself the
fun of this peculiar mystification. I therefore waited for him
to reach Paris, where the police arrangements suited me better
than in London. While I was looking about, and delaying
operations for his return, I happened to hear you wanted a
detective. So I offered myself as out of work to my old
employer, Marvillier, from whom I have had many good jobs in the
past; and there you get, in short, the kernel of the Colonel.

Naturally, after this, I can never go back as a detective
to Marvillier's. But, on the large scale on which I have
learned to work since I first had the pleasure of making
your delightful acquaintance, this matters little. To say
the truth, I begin to feel detective work a cut or two below
me. I am now a gentleman of means and leisure. Besides, the
extra knowledge of your movements which I have acquired in
your house has helped still further to give me various holds
upon you. So the fluke will be true to his own pet lamb. To
vary the metaphor, you are not fully shorn yet.

Remember me most kindly to your charming family, give
Wentworth my love, and tell Mlle. Césarine I owe her a grudge
which I shall never forget. She clearly suspected me. You are
much too rich, dear Charles; I relieve your plethora. I bleed
you financially. Therefore I consider myself--Your sincerest
friend,

CLAY-BRABAZON-MEDHURST,

Fellow of the Royal College of Surgeons.


Charles was threatened with apoplexy. This blow was severe.
Whom can I trust, he asked, plaintively, when the detectives
themselves, whom I employ to guard me, turn out to be swindlers
Don't you remember that line in the Latin grammar--something about,
'Who shall watch the watchers' I think it used to run, 'Quis
custodes custodiet ipsos'

But I felt this episode had at least disproved my suspicions of
poor Césarine.



VIII

THE EPISODE OF THE SELDON GOLD-MINE


On our return to London, Charles and Marvillier had a difference
of opinion on the subject of Medhurst.

Charles maintained that Marvillier ought to have known the man
with the cropped hair was Colonel Clay, and ought never to have
recommended him. Marvillier maintained that Charles had _seen_
Colonel Clay half-a-dozen times, at least, to his own never; and
that my respected brother-in-law had therefore nobody on earth
but himself to blame if the rogue imposed upon him. The head
detective had known Medhurst for ten years, he said, as a most
respectable man, and even a ratepayer; he had always found him the
cleverest of spies, as well he might be, indeed, on the familiar
set-a-thief-to-catch-a-thief principle. However, the upshot of
it all was, as usual--nothing. Marvillier was sorry to lose the
services of so excellent a hand; but he had done the very best
he could for Sir Charles, he declared; and if Sir Charles was
not satisfied, why, he might catch his Colonel Clays for himself
in future.

So I will, Sey, Charles remarked to me, as we walked back from
the office in the Strand by Piccadilly. I won't trust any more to
these private detectives. It's my belief they're a pack of thieves
themselves, in league with the rascals they're set to catch, and
with no more sense of honour than a Zulu diamond-hand.

Better try the police, I suggested, by way of being helpful.
One must assume an interest in one's employer's business.

But Charles shook his head. No, no, he said; I'm sick of all
these fellows. I shall trust in future to my own sagacity. We
learn by experience, Sey--and I've learned a thing or two. One of
them is this It's not enough to suspect everybody; you must have
no preconceptions. Divest yourself entirely of every fixed idea
if you wish to cope with a rascal of this calibre. Don't jump at
conclusions. We should disbelieve everything, as well as distrust
everybody. That's the road to success; and I mean to pursue it.

So, by way of pursuing it, Charles retired to Seldon.

The longer the man goes on, the worse he grows, he said to me
one morning. He's just like a tiger that has tasted blood. Every
successful haul seems only to make him more eager for another.
I fully expect now before long we shall see him down here.

About three weeks later, sure enough, my respected connection
received a communication from the abandoned swindler, with
an Austrian stamp and a Vienna post-mark.


MY DEAR VANDRIFT.--(After so long and so varied an acquaintance
we may surely drop the absurd formalities of 'Sir Charles' and
'Colonel.') I write to ask you a delicate question. Can you kindly
tell me exactly how much I have received from your various generous
acts during the last three years I have mislaid my account-book,
and as this is the season for making the income tax return, I am
anxious, as an honest and conscientious citizen, to set down my
average profits out of you for the triennial period. For reasons
which you will amply understand, I do not this time give my private
address, in Paris or elsewhere; but if you will kindly advertise
the total amount, above the signature 'Peter Simple,' in the Agony
Column of the Times, you will confer a great favour upon the
Revenue Commissioners, and also upon your constant friend and
companion, CUTHBERT CLAY,

Practical Socialist.

Mark my word, Sey, Charles said, laying the letter down, in a
week or less the man himself will follow. This is his cunning way
of trying to make me think he's well out of the country and far
away from Seldon. That means he's meditating another descent. But
he told us too much last time, when he was Medhurst the detective.
He gave us some hints about disguises and their unmasking that I
shall not forget. This turn I shall be even with him.

On Saturday of that week, in effect, we were walking along the road
that leads into the village, when we met a gentlemanly-looking man,
in a rough and rather happy-go-lucky brown tweed suit, who had the
air of a tourist. He was middle-aged, and of middle height; he wore
a small leather wallet suspended round his shoulder; and he was
peering about at the rocks in a suspicious manner. Something in
his gait attracted our attention.

Good-morning, he said, looking up as we passed; and Charles
muttered a somewhat surly inarticulate, Good-morning.

We went on without saying more. Well, _that's_ not Colonel Clay,
anyhow, I said, as we got out of earshot. For he accosted us
first; and you may remember it's one of the Colonel's most marked
peculiarities that, like the model child, he never speaks till he's
spoken to--never begins an acquaintance. He always waits till we
make the first advance; he doesn't go out of his way to cheat us;
he loiters about till we ask him to do it.

Seymour, my brother-in-law responded, in a severe tone, there
you are, now, doing the very thing I warned you not to do! You're
succumbing to a preconception. Avoid fixed ideas. The probability
is this man _is_ Colonel Clay. Strangers are generally scarce at
Seldon. If he isn't Colonel Clay, what's he here for, I'd like
to know What money is there to be made here in any other way
I shall inquire about him.

We dropped in at the Cromarty Arms, and asked good Mrs. M'Lachlan
if she could tell us anything about the gentlemanly stranger. Mrs.
M'Lachlan replied that he was from London, she believed, a pleasant
gentleman enough; and he had his wife with him.

Ha! Young Pretty Charles inquired, with a speaking glance at me.

Weel, Sir Charles, she'll no be exactly what you'd be ca'ing a
bonny lass, Mrs. M'Lachlan replied; but she's a guid body for
a' that, an' a fine braw woman.

Just what I should expect, Charles murmured, He varies the
programme. The fellow has tried White Heather as the parson's wife,
and as Madame Picardet, and as squinting little Mrs. Granton, and
as Medhurst's accomplice; and now, he has almost exhausted the
possibilities of a disguise for a really young and pretty woman;
so he's playing her off at last as the riper product--a handsome
matron. Clever, extremely clever; but--we begin to see through him.
And he chuckled to himself quietly.

Next day, on the hillside, we came upon our stranger again,
occupied as before in peering into the rocks, and sounding them
with a hammer. Charles nudged me and whispered, I have it this
time. He's posing as a geologist.

I took a good look at the man. By now, of course, we had some
experience of Colonel Clay in his various disguises; and I could
observe that while the nose, the hair, and the beard were varied,
the eyes and the build remained the same as ever. He was a trifle
stouter, of course, being got up as a man of between forty and
fifty; and his forehead was lined in a way which a less consummate
artist than Colonel Clay could easily have imitated. But I felt we
had at least some grounds for our identification; it would not do
to dismiss the suggestion of Clayhood at once as a flight of fancy.

His wife was sitting near, upon a bare boss of rock, reading a
volume of poems. Capital variant, that, a volume of poems! Exactly
suited the selected type of a cultivated family. White Heather and
Mrs. Granton never used to read poems. But that was characteristic
of all Colonel Clay's impersonations, and Mrs. Clay's too--for I
suppose I must call her so. They were not mere outer disguises;
they were finished pieces of dramatic study. Those two people were
an actor and actress, as well as a pair of rogues; and in both
their rôles they were simply inimitable.

As a rule, Charles is by no means polite to casual trespassers on
the Seldon estate; they get short shrift and a summary ejection.
But on this occasion he had a reason for being courteous, and he
approached the lady with a bow of recognition. Lovely day, he
said, isn't it Such belts on the sea, and the heather smells
sweet. You are stopping at the inn, I fancy

Yes, the lady answered, looking up at him with a charming smile.
(I know that smile, Charles whispered to me. I have succumbed to
it too often.) We're stopping at the inn, and my husband is doing
a little geology on the hill here. I hope Sir Charles Vandrift won't
come and catch us. He's so down upon trespassers. They tell us at
the inn he's a regular Tartar.

(Saucy minx as ever, Charles murmured to me. She said it on
purpose.) No, my dear madam, he continued, aloud; you have
been quite misinformed. _I_ am Sir Charles Vandrift; and I am _not_
a Tartar. If your husband is a man of science I respect and admire
him. It is geology that has made me what I am to-day. And he drew
himself up proudly. We owe to it the present development of South
African mining.

The lady blushed as one seldom sees a mature woman blush--but
exactly as I had seen Madame Picardet and White Heather. Oh, I'm
so sorry, she said, in a confused way that recalled Mrs. Granton.
Forgive my hasty speech. I--I didn't know you.

(She did, Charles whispered. But let that pass.) Oh, don't
think of it again; so many people disturb the birds, don't you know,
that we're obliged in self-defence to warn trespassers sometimes off
our lovely mountains. But I do it with regret--with profound regret.
I admire the--er--the beauties of Nature myself; and, therefore,
I desire that all others should have the freest possible access
to them--possible, that is to say, consistently with the superior
claims of Property.

I see, the lady replied, looking up at him quaintly. I admire
your wish, though not your reservation. I've just been reading
those sweet lines of Wordsworth's--

  And O, ye fountains, meadows, hills, and groves,
  Forebode not any severing of our loves.

I suppose you know them And she beamed on him pleasantly.

Know them Charles answered. Know them! Oh, of course, I know
them. They're old favourites of mine--in fact, I adore Wordsworth.
(I doubt whether Charles has ever in his life read a line of poetry,
except Doss Chiderdoss in the Sporting Times.) He took the book
and glanced at them. Ah, charming, charming! he said, in his most
ecstatic tone. But his eyes were on the lady, and not on the poet.

I saw in a moment how things stood. No matter under what disguise
that woman appeared to him, and whether he recognised her or not,
Charles couldn't help falling a victim to Madame Picardet's
attractions. Here he actually suspected her; yet, like a moth
round a candle, he was trying his hardest to get his wings singed!
I almost despised him with his gigantic intellect! The greatest
men are the greatest fools, I verily believe, when there's a woman
in question.

The husband strolled up by this time, and entered into conversation
with us. According to his own account, his name was Forbes-Gaskell,
and he was a Professor of Geology in one of those new-fangled
northern colleges. He had come to Seldon rock-spying, he said, and
found much to interest him. He was fond of fossils, but his special
hobby was rocks and minerals. He knew a vast deal about cairngorms
and agates and such-like pretty things, and showed Charles quartz
and felspar and red cornelian, and I don't know what else, in the
crags on the hillside. Charles pretended to listen to him with the
deepest interest and even respect, never for a moment letting him
guess he knew for what purpose this show of knowledge had been
recently acquired. If we were ever to catch the man, we must not
allow him to see we suspected him. So Charles played a dark game.
He swallowed the geologist whole without question.

Most of that morning we spent with them on the hillside. Charles
took them everywhere and showed them everything. He pretended to be
polite to the scientific man, and he was really polite, most polite,
to the poetical lady. Before lunch time we had become quite friends.

The Clays were always easy people to get on with; and, bar their
roguery, we could not deny they were delightful companions. Charles
asked them in to lunch. They accepted willingly. He introduced them
to Amelia with sundry raisings of his eyebrows and contortions
of his mouth. Professor and Mrs. Forbes-Gaskell, he said,
half-dislocating his jaw with his violent efforts. They're stopping
at the inn, dear. I've been showing them over the place, and they're
good enough to say they'll drop in and take a share in our cold
roast mutton; which was a frequent form of Charles's pleasantry.

Amelia sent them upstairs to wash their hands--which, in the
Professor's case, was certainly desirable, for his fingers were
grimed with earth and dust from the rocks he had been investigating.
As soon as we were left alone Charles drew me into the library.

Seymour, he said, more than ever there is a need for us strictly
to avoid preconceptions. We must not make up our minds that this man
is Colonel Clay--nor, again, that he isn't. We must remember that we
have been mistaken in _both_ ways in the past, and must avoid our
old errors. I shall hold myself in readiness for either event--and
a policeman in readiness to arrest them, if necessary!

A capital plan, I murmured. Still, if I may venture a suggestion,
in what way are these two people endeavouring to entrap us They
have no scheme on hand--no schloss, no amalgamation.

Seymour, my brother-in-law answered in his board-room style, you
are a great deal too previous, as Medhurst used to say--I mean,
Colonel Clay in his character as Medhurst. In the first place, these
are early days; our friends have not yet developed their intentions.
We may find before long they have a property to sell, or a company
to promote, or a concession to exploit in South Africa or elsewhere.
Then again, in the second place, we don't always spot the exact
nature of their plan until it has burst in our hands, so to speak,
and revealed its true character. What could have seemed more
transparent than Medhurst, the detective, till he ran away with our
notes in the very moment of triumph What more innocent than White
Heather and the little curate, till they landed us with a couple
of Amelia's own gems as a splendid bargain I will not take it for
granted _any_ man is not Colonel Clay, merely because I don't happen
to spot the particular scheme he is trying to work against me. The
rogue has so many schemes, and some of them so well concealed, that
up to the moment of the actual explosion you fail to detect the
presence of moral dynamite. Therefore, I shall proceed as if there
were dynamite everywhere. But in the third place--and this is _very_
important--you mark my words, I believe I detect already the lines
he will work upon. He's a geologist, he says, with a taste for
minerals. Very good. You see if he doesn't try to persuade me before
long he has found a coal mine, whose locality he will disclose for
a trifling consideration; or else he will salt the Long Mountain
with emeralds, and claim a big share for helping to discover them;
or else he will try something in the mineralogical line to _do_ me
somehow. I see it in the very transparency of the fellow's face;
and I'm determined this time neither to pay him one farthing on
any pretext, nor to let him escape me!

We went in to lunch. The Professor and Mrs. Forbes-Gaskell, all
smiles, accompanied us. I don't know whether it was Charles's
warning to take nothing for granted that made me do so--but I kept
a close eye upon the suspected man all the time we were at table.
It struck me there was something very odd about his hair. It
didn't seem quite the same colour all over. The locks that hung
down behind, over the collar of his coat, were a trifle lighter and
a trifle grayer than the black mass that covered the greater part
of his head. I examined it carefully. The more I did so, the more
the conviction grew upon me he was wearing a wig. There was no
denying it!

A trifle less artistic, perhaps, than most of Colonel Clay's
get-ups; but then, I reflected (on Charles's principle of taking
nothing for granted), we had never before suspected Colonel Clay
himself, except in the one case of the Honourable David, whose red
hair and whiskers even Madame Picardet had admitted to be absurdly
false by her action of pointing at them and tittering irrepressibly.
It was possible that in every case, if we had scrutinised our man
closely, we should have found that the disguise betrayed itself
at once (as Medhurst had suggested) to an acute observer.

The detective, in fact, had told us too much. I remembered what he
said to us about knocking off David Granton's red wig the moment
we doubted him; and I positively tried to help myself awkwardly
to potato-chips, when the footman offered them, so as to hit the
supposed wig with an apparently careless brush of my elbow. But
it was of no avail. The fellow seemed to anticipate or suspect my
intention, and dodged aside carefully, like one well accustomed
to saving his disguise from all chance of such real or seeming
accidents.

I was so full of my discovery that immediately after lunch I induced
Isabel to take our new friends round the home garden and show them
Charles's famous prize dahlias, while I proceeded myself to narrate
to Charles and Amelia my observations and my frustrated experiment.

It _is_ a wig, Amelia assented. _I_ spotted it at once. A very
good wig, too, and most artistically planted. Men don't notice these
things, though women do. It is creditable to you, Seymour, to have
succeeded in detecting it.

Charles was less complimentary. You fool, he answered, with that
unpleasant frankness which is much too common with him. Supposing
it _is_, why on earth should you try to knock it off and disclose
him What good would it have done If it _is_ a wig, and we spot it,
that's all that we need. We are put on our guard; we know with whom
we have now to deal. But you can't take a man up on a charge of
wig-wearing. The law doesn't interfere with it. Most respectable men
may sometimes wear wigs. Why, I knew a promoter who did, and also
the director of fourteen companies! What we have to do next is, wait
till he tries to cheat us, and then--pounce down upon him. Sooner
or later, you may be sure, his plans will reveal themselves.

So we concocted an excellent scheme to keep them under constant
observation, lest they should slip away again, as they did from the
island. First of all, Amelia was to ask them to come and stop at the
castle, on the ground that the rooms at the inn were uncomfortably
small. We felt sure, however, that, as on a previous occasion,
they would refuse the invitation, in order to be able to slink
off unperceived, in case they should find themselves apparently
suspected. Should they decline, it was arranged that Césarine should
take a room at the Cromarty Arms as long as they stopped there, and
report upon their movements; while, during the day, we would have
the house watched by the head gillie's son, a most intelligent
young man, who could be trusted, with true Scotch canniness, to
say nothing to anybody.

To our immense surprise, Mrs. Forbes-Gaskell accepted the invitation
with the utmost alacrity. She was profuse in her thanks, indeed; for
she told us the Arms was an ill-kept house, and the cookery by no
means agreed with her husband's liver. It was sweet of us to invite
them; such kindness to perfect strangers was quite unexpected. She
should always say that nowhere on earth had she met with so cordial
or friendly a reception as at Seldon Castle. But--she accepted,
unreservedly.

It _can't_ be Colonel Clay, I remarked to Charles. He would never
have come here. Even as David Granton, with far more reason for
coming, he wouldn't put himself in our power he preferred the
security and freedom of the Cromarty Arms.

Sey, my brother-in-law said sententiously, you're incorrigible.
You _will_ persist in being the slave of prepossessions. He may
have some good reason of his own for accepting. Wait till he shows
his hand--and then, we shall understand everything.

So for the next three weeks the Forbes-Gaskells formed part of the
house-party at Seldon. I must say, Charles paid them most assiduous
attention. He positively neglected his other guests in order to keep
close to the two new-comers. Mrs. Forbes-Gaskell noticed the fact,
and commented on it. You are really too good to us, Sir Charles,
she said. I'm afraid you allow us quite to monopolise you!

But Charles, gallant as ever, replied with a smile, We have
you with us for so short a time, you know! Which made Mrs.
Forbes-Gaskell blush again that delicious blush of hers.

During all this time the Professor went on calmly and persistently
mineralogising. Wonderful character! Charles said to me. He works
out his parts so well! Could anything exceed the picture he gives
one of scientific ardour And, indeed, he was at it, morning, noon,
and night. Sooner or later, Charles observed, something practical
must come of it.

Twice, meanwhile, little episodes occurred which are well worth
notice. One day I was out with the Professor on the Long Mountain,
watching him hammer at the rocks, and a little bored by his
performance, when, to pass the time, I asked him what a particular
small water-worn stone was. He looked at it and smiled. If there
were a little more mica in it, he said, it would be the
characteristic gneiss of ice-borne boulders, hereabouts. But
there isn't _quite_ enough. And he gazed at it curiously.

Indeed, I answered, it doesn't come up to sample, doesn't it

He gave me a meaning look. Ten per cent, he murmured in a slow,
strange voice; ten per cent is more usual.

I trembled violently. Was he bent, then, upon ruining me If you
betray me-- I cried, and broke off.

I beg your pardon, he said. He was all pure innocence.

I reflected on what Charles had said about taking nothing for
granted, and held my tongue prudently.

The other incident was this. Charles picked a sprig of white heather
on the hill one afternoon, after a picnic lunch, I regret to say,
when he had taken perhaps a glass more champagne than was strictly
good for him. He was not exactly the worse for it, but he was
excited, good-humoured, reckless, and lively. He brought the sprig
to Mrs. Forbes-Gaskell, and handed it to her, ogling a little.
Sweets to the sweet, he murmured, and looked at her meaningly.
White heather to White Heather. Then he saw what he had done,
and checked himself instantly.

Mrs. Forbes-Gaskell coloured up in the usual manner. I--I don't
quite understand, she faltered.

Charles scrambled out of it somehow. White heather for luck, he
said, and--the man who is privileged to give a piece of it to you
is surely lucky.

She smiled, none too well pleased. I somehow felt she suspected us
of suspecting her.

However, as it turned out, nothing came, after all, of the untoward
incident.

Next day Charles burst upon me, triumphant. Well, he has shown
his hand! he cried. I knew he would. He has come to me to-day
with--what do you think--a fragment of gold, in quartz, from the
Long Mountain.

No! I exclaimed.

Yes, Charles answered. He says there's a vein there with distinct
specks of gold in it, which might be worth mining. When a man begins
_that_ way you know what he's driving at! And what's more, he's got
up the subject beforehand; for he began saying to me there had long
been gold in Sutherlandshire--why not therefore in Ross-shire
And then he went at full into the comparative geology of the two
regions.

This is serious, I said. What will you do

Wait and watch, Charles answered; and the moment he develops a
proposal for shares in the syndicate to work the mine, or a sum of
money down as the price of his discovery--get in the police, and
arrest him.

For the next few days the Professor was more active and ardent than
ever. He went peering about the rocks on every side with his hammer.
He kept on bringing in little pieces of stone, with gold specks
stuck in them, and talking learnedly of the probable cost of
crushing and milling. Charles had heard all that before; in
point of fact, he had assisted at the drafting of some dozens of
prospectuses. So he took no notice, and waited for the man with the
wig to develop his proposals. He knew they would come soon; and he
watched and waited. But, of course, to draw him on he pretended to
be interested.

While we were all in this attitude of mind, attending on Providence
and Colonel Clay, we happened to walk down by the shore one day, in
the opposite direction from the Seamew's island. Suddenly we came
upon the Professor linked arm-in-arm with--Sir Adolphus Cordery!
They were wrapped in deep talk, and appeared to be most amicable.

Now, naturally, relations had been a trifle strained between Sir
Adolphus and the house of Vandrift since the incident of the Slump;
but under the present circumstances, and with such a matter at stake
as the capture of Colonel Clay, it was necessary to overlook all
such minor differences. So Charles managed to disengage the
Professor from his friend, sent Amelia on with Forbes-Gaskell
towards the castle, and stopped behind, himself, with Sir Adolphus
and me, to clear up the question.

Do you know this man, Cordery he asked, with some little
suspicion.

Know him Why, of course I do, Sir Adolphus answered. He's
Marmaduke Forbes-Gaskell, of the Yorkshire College, a very
distinguished man of science. First-rate mineralogist--perhaps
the best (_but_ one) in England. Modesty forbade him to name the
exception.

But are you sure it's he Charles inquired, with growing
doubt. Have you known him before This isn't a second case of
Schleiermachering me, is it

Sure it's he Sir Adolphus echoed. Am I sure of myself Why, I've
known Marmy Gaskell ever since we were at Trinity together. Knew him
before he married Miss Forbes of Glenluce, my wife's second cousin,
and hyphened his name with hers, to keep the property in the family.
Know them both most intimately. Came down here to the inn because I
heard that Marmy was on the prowl among these hills, and I thought he
had probably something good to prowl after--in the way of fossils.

But the man wears a wig! Charles expostulated.

Of course, Cordery answered. He's as bald as a bat--in front at
least--and he wears a wig to cover his baldness.

It's disgraceful, Charles exclaimed; disgraceful--taking us in
like that. And he grew red as a turkey-cock.

Sir Adolphus has no delicacy. He burst out laughing.

Oh, I see, he cried out, simply bursting with amusement. You
thought Forbes-Gaskell was Colonel Clay in disguise! Oh, my stars,
what a lovely one!

_You_, at least, have no right to laugh, Charles responded, drawing
himself up and growing still redder. You led me once into a
similar scrape, and then backed out of it in a way unbecoming a
gentleman. Besides, he went on, getting angrier at each word,
this fellow, whoever he is, has been trying to cheat me on his
own account. Colonel Clay or no Colonel Clay, he's been salting my
rocks with gold-bearing quartz, and trying to lead me on into an
absurd speculation!

Sir Adolphus exploded. Oh, this is too good, he cried. I must
go and tell Marmy! And he rushed off to where Forbes-Gaskell was
seated on a corner of rock with Amelia.

As for Charles and myself, we returned to the house. Half an hour
later Forbes-Gaskell came back, too, in a towering temper.

What is the meaning of this, sir he shouted out, as soon as
he caught sight of Charles. I'm told you've invited my wife
and myself here to your house in order to spy upon us, under the
impression that I was Clay, the notorious swindler!

I thought you were, Charles answered, equally angry. Perhaps you
may be still! Anyhow, you're a rogue, and you tried to bamboozle
me!

Forbes-Gaskell, white with rage, turned to his trembling wife.
Gertrude, he said, pack up your box and come away from these
people instantly. Their pretended hospitality has been a studied
insult. They've put you and me in a most ridiculous position. We
were told before we came here--and no doubt with truth--that Sir
Charles Vandrift was the most close-fisted and tyrannical old
curmudgeon in Scotland. We've been writing to all our friends to
say ecstatically that he was, on the contrary, a most hospitable,
generous, and large-hearted gentleman. And now we find out he's a
disgusting cad, who asks strangers to his house from the meanest
motives, and then insults his guests with gratuitous vituperation.
It is well such people should hear the plain truth now and again in
their lives; and it therefore gives me the greatest pleasure to tell
Sir Charles Vandrift that he's a vulgar bounder of the first water.
Go and pack your box, Gertrude! I'll run down to the Cromarty Arms,
and order a cab to carry us away at once from this inhospitable
sham castle.

You wear a wig, sir; you wear a wig, Charles exclaimed,
half-choking with passion. For, indeed, as Forbes-Gaskell spoke,
and tossed his head angrily, the nature of his hair-covering grew
painfully apparent. It was quite one-sided.

I do, sir, that I may be able to shake it in the face of a cad!
the Professor responded, tearing it off to readjust it; and, suiting
the action to the word, he brandished it thrice in Charles's eyes;
after which he darted from the room, speechless with indignation.

As soon as they were gone, and Charles had recovered breath
sufficiently to listen to rational conversation, I ventured to
observe, This comes of being too sure! We made one mistake. We
took it for granted that because a man wears a wig, he _must_ be
an impostor--which does not necessarily follow. We forgot that not
Colonel Clays alone have false coverings to their heads, and that
wigs may sometimes be worn from motives of pure personal vanity.
In fact, we were again the slaves of preconceptions.

I looked at him pointedly. Charles rose before he replied. Seymour
Wentworth, he said at last, gazing down upon me with lofty scorn,
your moralising is ill-timed. It appears to me you entirely
misunderstand the position and duties of a private secretary!

The oddest part of it all, however, was this--that Charles, being
convinced Forbes-Gaskell, though he wasn't Colonel Clay, had been
fraudulently salting the rocks with gold, with intent to deceive,
took no further notice of the alleged discoveries. The consequence
was that Forbes-Gaskell and Sir Adolphus went elsewhere with the
secret; and it was not till after Charles had sold the Seldon
Castle estate (which he did shortly afterward, the place having
somehow grown strangely distasteful to him) that the present
Seldon Eldorados, Limited, were put upon the market by Lord
Craig-Ellachie, who purchased the place from him. Forbes-Gaskell,
as it happened, had reported to Craig-Ellachie that he had found
a lode of high-grade ore on an estate unnamed, which he would
particularise on promise of certain contingent claims to founder's
shares; and the old lord jumped at it. Charles sold at grouse-moor
prices; and the consequence is that the capital of the Eldorados
is yielding at present very fair returns, even after allowing for
expenses of promotion--while Charles has been done out of a good
thing in gold-mines!

But, remembering the position and duties of a private secretary,
I refrained from pointing out to him at the time that this loss was
due to a fixed idea--though as a matter of fact it depended upon
Charles's strange preconception that the man with the wig, whoever
he might be, was trying to diddle him.



IX

THE EPISODE OF THE JAPANNED DISPATCH-BOX


Sey, my brother-in-law said next spring, I'm sick and tired
of London! Let's shoulder our wallets at once, and I will to
some distant land, where no man doth me know.

Mars or Mercury I inquired; for, in our own particular planet,
I'm afraid you'll find it just a trifle difficult for Sir Charles
Vandrift to hide his light under a bushel.

Oh, I'll manage it, Charles answered. What's the good of being
a millionaire, I should like to know, if you're always obliged to
'behave as sich' I shall travel incog. I'm dog-tired of being
dogged by these endless impostors.

And, indeed, we had passed through a most painful winter. Colonel
Clay had stopped away for some months, it is true, and for my own
part, I will confess, since it wasn't _my_ place to pay the piper, I
rather missed the wonted excitement than otherwise. But Charles had
grown horribly and morbidly suspicious. He carried out his principle
of distrusting everybody and disbelieving everything, till life
was a burden to him. He spotted impossible Colonel Clays under a
thousand disguises; he was quite convinced he had frightened his
enemy away at least a dozen times over, beneath the varying garb
of a fat club waiter, a tall policeman, a washerwoman's boy, a
solicitor's clerk, the Bank of England beadle, and the collector
of water-rates. He saw him as constantly, and in as changeful forms,
as mediæval saints used to see the devil. Amelia and I really
began to fear for the stability of that splendid intellect; we
foresaw that unless the Colonel Clay nuisance could be abated
somehow, Charles might sink by degrees to the mental level of a
common or ordinary Stock-Exchange plunger.

So, when my brother-in-law announced his intention of going away
incog. to parts unknown, on the succeeding Saturday, Amelia and
I felt a flush of relief from long-continued tension. Especially
Amelia--who was _not_ going with him.

For rest and quiet, he said to us at breakfast, laying down the
Morning Post, give _me_ the deck of an Atlantic liner! No letters;
no telegrams. No stocks; no shares. No Times; no Saturday. I'm sick
of these papers!

The World is too much with us, I assented cheerfully. I regret
to say, nobody appreciated the point of my quotation.

Charles took infinite pains, I must admit, to ensure perfect
secrecy. He made me write and secure the best state-rooms--main
deck, amidships--under my own name, without mentioning his, in
the Etruria, for New York, on her very next voyage. He spoke of
his destination to nobody but Amelia; and Amelia warned Césarine,
under pains and penalties, on no account to betray it to the other
servants. Further to secure his incog., Charles assumed the style
and title of Mr. Peter Porter, and booked as such in the Etruria
at Liverpool.

The day before starting, however, he went down with me to the City
for an interview with his brokers in Adam's Court, Old Broad Street.
Finglemore, the senior partner, hastened, of course, to receive us.
As we entered his private room a good-looking young man rose and
lounged out. Halloa, Finglemore, Charles said, that's that scamp
of a brother of yours! I thought you had shipped him off years and
years ago to China

So I did, Sir Charles, Finglemore answered, rubbing his hands
somewhat nervously. But he never went there. Being an idle young
dog, with a taste for amusement, he got for the time no further
than Paris. Since then, he's hung about a bit, here, there, and
everywhere, and done no particular good for himself or his family.
But about three or four years ago he somehow 'struck ile' he went
to South Africa, poaching on your preserves; and now he's back
again--rich, married, and respectable. His wife, a nice little
woman, has reformed him. Well, what can I do for you this morning

Charles has large interests in America, in Santa Fé and Topekas, and
other big concerns; and he insisted on taking out several documents
and vouchers connected in various ways with his widespread ventures
there. He meant to go, he said, for complete rest and change, on a
general tour of private inquiry--New York, Chicago, Colorado, the
mining districts. It was a millionaire's holiday. So he took all
these valuables in a black japanned dispatch-box, which he guarded
like a child with absurd precautions. He never allowed that box out
of his sight one moment; and he gave me no peace as to its safety
and integrity. It was a perfect fetish. We must be cautious, he
said, Sey, cautious! Especially in travelling. Recollect how that
little curate spirited the diamonds out of Amelia's jewel-case! I
shall not let this box out of my sight. I shall stick to it myself,
if we go to the bottom.

We did _not_ go to the bottom. It is the proud boast of the Cunard
Company that it has never lost a passenger's life; and the captain
would not consent to send the Etruria to Davy Jones's locker, merely
in order to give Charles a chance of sticking to his dispatch-box
under trying circumstances. On the contrary, we had a delightful
and uneventful passage; and we found our fellow-passengers most
agreeable people. Charles, as Mr. Peter Porter, being freed for
the moment from his terror of Colonel Clay, would have felt really
happy, I believe--had it not been for the dispatch-box. He made
friends from the first hour (quite after the fearless old fashion
of the days before Colonel Clay had begun to embitter life for him)
with a nice American doctor and his charming wife, on their way back
to Kentucky. Dr. Elihu Quackenboss--that was his characteristically
American name--had been studying medicine for a year in Vienna, and
was now returning to his native State with a brain close crammed
with all the latest bacteriological and antiseptic discoveries. His
wife, a pretty and piquant little American, with a tip-tilted nose
and the quaint sharpness of her countrywomen, amused Charles not a
little. The funny way in which she would make room for him by her
side on the bench on deck, and say, with a sweet smile, You sit
right here, Mr. Porter; the sun's just elegant, delighted and
flattered him. He was proud to find out that female attention was
not always due to his wealth and title; and that plain Mr. Porter
could command on his merits the same amount of blandishments as Sir
Charles Vandrift, the famous millionaire, on his South African
celebrity.

During the whole of that voyage, it was Mrs. Quackenboss here, and
Mrs. Quackenboss there, and Mrs. Quackenboss the other place, till,
for Amelia's sake, I was glad she was not on board to witness it.
Long before we sighted Sandy Hook, I will admit, I was fairly sick
of Charles's two-stringed harp--Mrs. Quackenboss and the
dispatch-box.

Mrs. Quackenboss, it turned out, was an amateur artist, and she
painted Sir Charles, on calm days on deck, in all possible
attitudes. She seemed to find him a most attractive model.

The doctor, too, was a precious clever fellow. He knew something of
chemistry--and of most other subjects, including, as I gathered, the
human character. For he talked to Charles about various ideas of
his, with which he wished to liven up folks in Kentucky a bit, on
his return, till Charles conceived the highest possible regard for
his intelligence and enterprise. That's a go-ahead fellow, Sey!
he remarked to me one day. Has the right sort of grit in him!
Those Americans are the men. Wish I had a round hundred of them on
my works in South Africa!

That idea seemed to grow upon him. He was immensely taken with it.
He had lately dismissed one of his chief superintendents at the
Cloetedorp mine, and he seriously debated whether or not he should
offer the post to the smart Kentuckian. For my own part, I am
inclined to connect this fact with his expressed determination to
visit his South African undertakings for three months yearly in
future; and I am driven to suspect he felt life at Cloetedorp would
be rendered much more tolerable by the agreeable society of a quaint
and amusing American lady.

If you offer it to him, I said, remember, you must disclose your
personality.

Not at all, Charles answered. I can keep it dark for the present,
till all is arranged for. I need only say I have interests in South
Africa.

So, one morning on deck, as we were approaching the Banks, he
broached his scheme gently to the doctor and Mrs. Quackenboss. He
remarked that he was connected with one of the biggest financial
concerns in the Southern hemisphere; and that he would pay Elihu
fifteen hundred a year to represent him at the diggings.

What, dollars the lady said, smiling and accentuating the
tip-tilted nose a little more. Oh, Mr. Porter, it ain't good
enough!

No, pounds, my dear madam, Charles responded. Pounds sterling,
you know. In United States currency, seven thousand five hundred.

I guess Elihu would just jump at it, Mrs. Quackenboss replied,
looking at him quizzically.

The doctor laughed. You make a good bid, sir, he said, in his slow
American way, emphasising all the most unimportant words _But_ you
overlook one element. I _am_ a man of science, not a speculator. I
_have_ trained myself for medical work, _at_ considerable cost, _in_
the best schools of Europe, _and_ I do not propose _to_ fling away
the results _of_ much arduous labour _by_ throwing myself out
elastically _into_ a new line of work _for_ which my faculties _may_
not perhaps equally adapt me.

(How thoroughly American! I murmured, in the background.)

Charles insisted; all in vain. Mrs. Quackenboss was impressed; but
the doctor smiled always a sphinx-like smile, and reiterated his
belief in the unfitness of mid-stream as an ideal place for swopping
horses. The more he declined, and the better he talked, the more
eager Charles became each day to secure him. And, as if on purpose
to draw him on, the doctor each day gave more and more surprising
proofs of his practical abilities. I _am_ not a specialist, he said.
I just ketch the drift, appropriate the kernel, _and_ let the rest
slide.

He could do anything, it really seemed, from shoeing a mule to
conducting a camp-meeting; he was a capital chemist, a very sound
surgeon, a fair judge of horseflesh, a first class euchre player,
and a pleasing baritone. When occasion demanded he could occupy a
pulpit. He had invented a cork-screw which brought him in a small
revenue; and he was now engaged in the translation of a Polish work
on the Application of Hydrocyanic Acid to the Cure of Leprosy.

Still, we reached New York without having got any nearer our goal,
as regarded Dr. Quackenboss. He came to bid us good-bye at the quay,
with that sphinx-like smile still playing upon his features. Charles
clutched the dispatch-box with one hand, and Mrs. Quackenboss's
little palm with the other.

_Don't_ tell us, he said, this is good-bye--for ever! And his
voice quite faltered.

I guess so, Mr. Porter, the pretty American replied, with a
telling glance. What hotel do you patronise

The Murray Hill, Charles responded.

Oh my, ain't that odd Mrs. Quackenboss echoed. The Murray Hill!
Why, that's just where we're going too, Elihu!

The upshot of which was that Charles persuaded them, before
returning to Kentucky, to diverge for a few days with us to Lake
George and Lake Champlain, where he hoped to over-persuade the
recalcitrant doctor.

To Lake George therefore we went, and stopped at the excellent hotel
at the terminus of the railway. We spent a good deal of our time on
the light little steamers that ply between that point and the road
to Ticonderoga. Somehow, the mountains mirrored in the deep green
water reminded me of Lucerne; and Lucerne reminded me of the little
curate. For the first time since we left England a vague terror
seized me. _Could_ Elihu Quackenboss be Colonel Clay again, still
dogging our steps through the opposite continent

I could not help mentioning my suspicion to Charles--who, strange
to say, pooh-poohed it. He had been paying great court to Mrs.
Quackenboss that day, and was absurdly elated because the little
American had rapped his knuckles with her fan and called him a
real silly.

Next day, however, an odd thing occurred. We strolled out together,
all four of us, along the banks of the lake, among woods just
carpeted with strange, triangular flowers--trilliums, Mrs.
Quackenboss called them--and lined with delicate ferns in the
first green of springtide.

I began to grow poetical. (I wrote verses in my youth before I went
to South Africa.) We threw ourselves on the grass, near a small
mountain stream that descended among moss-clad boulders from the
steep woods above us. The Kentuckian flung himself at full length
on the sward, just in front of Charles. He had a strange head of
hair, very thick and shaggy. I don't know why, but, of a sudden, it
reminded me of the Mexican Seer, whom we had learned to remember as
Colonel Clay's first embodiment. At the same moment the same thought
seemed to run through Charles's head; for, strange to say, with
a quick impulse he leant forward and examined it. I saw Mrs.
Quackenboss draw back in wonder. The hair looked too thick and close
for nature. It ended abruptly, I now remembered, with a sharp line
on the forehead. Could this, too, be a wig It seemed very probable.

Even as I thought that thought, Charles appeared to form a sudden
and resolute determination. With one lightning swoop he seized the
doctor's hair in his powerful hand, and tried to lift it off bodily.
He had made a bad guess. Next instant the doctor uttered a loud and
terrified howl of pain, while several of his hairs, root and all,
came out of his scalp in Charles's hand, leaving a few drops of
blood on the skin of the head in the place they were torn from.
There was no doubt at all it was not a wig, but the Kentuckian's
natural hirsute covering.

The scene that ensued I am powerless to describe. My pen is unequal
to it. The doctor arose, not so much angry as astonished, white and
incredulous. What did you do that for, any way he asked, glaring
fiercely at my brother-in-law. Charles was all abject apology. He
began by profusely expressing his regret, and offering to make any
suitable reparation, monetary or otherwise. Then he revealed his
whole hand. He admitted that he was Sir Charles Vandrift, the famous
millionaire, and that he had suffered egregiously from the endless
machinations of a certain Colonel Clay, a machiavellian rogue,
who had hounded him relentlessly round the capitals of Europe. He
described in graphic detail how the impostor got himself up with
wigs and wax, so as to deceive even those who knew him intimately;
and then he threw himself on Dr. Quackenboss's mercy, as a man who
had been cruelly taken in so often that he could not help suspecting
the best of men falsely. Mrs. Quackenboss admitted it was natural to
have suspicions--Especially, she said, with candour, as you're
not the first to observe the notable way Elihu's hair seems to
originate from his forehead, and she pulled it up to show us. But
Elihu himself sulked on in the dumps his dignity was offended.
_If_ you wanted to know, he said, you might as well have asked me.
Assault _and_ battery _is_ not the right way to test whether _a_
citizen's hair is primitive or acquired.

It was an impulse, Charles pleaded; an instinctive impulse!

Civilised man restrains his impulses, the doctor answered. You
_have_ lived too long _in_ South Africa, Mr. Porter--I mean, Sir
Charles Vandrift, if that's the right way _to_ address such a
gentleman. You appear to _have_ imbibed the habits _and_ manners
of the Kaffirs you lived among.

For the next two days, I will really admit, Charles seemed more
wretched than I could have believed it possible for him to be on
somebody else's account. He positively grovelled. The fact was,
he saw he had hurt Dr. Quackenboss's feelings, and--much to my
surprise--he seemed truly grieved at it. If the doctor would have
accepted a thousand pounds down to shake hands at once and forget
the incident--in my opinion Charles would have gladly paid it.
Indeed, he said as much in other words to the pretty American--for
he could not insult her by offering her money. Mrs. Quackenboss did
her best to make it up, for she was a kindly little creature, in
spite of her roguishness; but Elihu stood aloof. Charles urged him
still to go out to South Africa, increasing his bait to two thousand
a year; yet the doctor was immovable. No, no, he said; I had half
decided _to_ accept your offer--_till_ that unfortunate impulse; but
that settled the question. _As_ an American citizen, I decline _to_
become the representative _of_ a British nobleman who takes such means
_of_ investigating questions which affect the hair and happiness _of_
his fellow-creatures.

I don't know whether Charles was most disappointed at missing the
chance of so clever a superintendent for the mine at Cloetedorp, or
elated at the novel description of himself as a British nobleman;
which is not precisely our English idea of a colonial knighthood.

Three days later, accordingly, the Quackenbosses left the Lakeside
Hotel. We were bound on an expedition up the lake ourselves, when
the pretty little woman burst in with a dash to tell us they were
leaving. She was charmingly got up in the neatest and completest of
American travelling-dresses. Charles held her hand affectionately.
I'm sorry it's good-bye, he said. I have done my best to secure
your husband.

You couldn't have tried harder than I did, the little woman
answered, and the tip-tilted nose looked quite pathetic; for I just
hate to be buried right down there in Kentucky! However, Elihu is
the sort of man a woman can neither drive nor lead; so we've got to
put up with him. And she smiled upon us sweetly, and disappeared
for ever.

Charles was disconsolate all that day. Next morning he rose, and
announced his intention of setting out for the West on his tour of
inspection. He would recreate by revelling in Colorado silver lodes.

We packed our own portmanteaus, for Charles had not brought even
Simpson with him, and then we prepared to set out by the morning
train for Saratoga.

Up till almost the last moment Charles nursed his dispatch-box.
But as the baggage-smashers were taking down our luggage, and a
chambermaid was lounging officiously about in search of a tip,
he laid it down for a second or two on the centre table while he
collected his other immediate impedimenta. He couldn't find his
cigarette-case, and went back to the bedroom for it. I helped
him hunt, but it had disappeared mysteriously. That moment lost
him. When we had found the cigarette-case, and returned to the
sitting-room--lo, and behold! the dispatch-box was missing!
Charles questioned the servants, but none of them had noticed it.
He searched round the room--not a trace of it anywhere.

Why, I laid it down here just two minutes ago! he cried. But it
was not forthcoming.

It'll turn up in time, I said. Everything turns up in the
end--including Mrs. Quackenboss's nose.

Seymour, said my brother-in-law, your hilarity is inopportune.

To say the truth, Charles was beside himself with anger. He took
the elevator down to the Bureau, as they call it, and complained
to the manager. The manager, a sharp-faced New Yorker, smiled as
he remarked in a nonchalant way that guests with valuables were
required to leave them in charge of the management, in which case
they were locked up in the safe and duly returned to the depositor
on leaving. Charles declared somewhat excitedly that he had been
robbed, and demanded that nobody should be allowed to leave the
hotel till the dispatch-box was discovered. The manager, quite cool,
and obtrusively picking his teeth, responded that such tactics might
be possible in an hotel of the European size, putting up a couple
of hundred guests or so; but that an American house, with over a
thousand visitors--many of whom came and went daily--could not
undertake such a quixotic quest on behalf of a single foreign
complainant.

That epithet, foreign, stung Charles to the quick. No Englishman
can admit that he is anywhere a foreigner. Do you know who I am,
sir he asked, angrily. I am Sir Charles Vandrift, of London--a
member of the English Parliament.

You may be the Prince of Wales, the man answered, for all I care.
You'll get the same treatment as anyone else, in America. But if
you're Sir Charles Vandrift, he went on, examining his books, how
does it come you've registered as Mr. Peter Porter

Charles grew red with embarrassment. The difficulty deepened.

The dispatch-box, always covered with a leather case, bore on its
inner lid the name Sir Charles Vandrift, K.C.M.G., distinctly
painted in the orthodox white letters. This was a painful
contretemps he had lost his precious documents; he had given a
false name; and he had rendered the manager supremely careless
whether or not he recovered his stolen property. Indeed, seeing he
had registered as Porter, and now claimed as Vandrift, the manager
hinted in pretty plain language he very much doubted whether there
had ever been a dispatch-box in the matter at all, or whether, if
there were one, it had ever contained any valuable documents.

We spent a wretched morning. Charles went round the hotel,
questioning everybody as to whether they had seen his dispatch-box.
Most of the visitors resented the question as a personal imputation;
one fiery Virginian, indeed, wanted to settle the point then and
there with a six-shooter. Charles telegraphed to New York to prevent
the shares and coupons from being negotiated; but his brokers
telegraphed back that, though they had stopped the numbers as far
as possible, they did so with reluctance, as they were not aware of
Sir Charles Vandrift being now in the country. Charles declared he
wouldn't leave the hotel till he recovered his property; and for
myself, I was inclined to suppose we would have to remain there
accordingly for the term of our natural lives--and longer.

That night again we spent at the Lakeside Hotel. In the small hours
of the morning, as I lay awake and meditated, a thought broke
across me. I was so excited by it that I rose and rushed into my
brother-in-law's bedroom. Charles, Charles! I exclaimed, we have
taken too much for granted once more. Perhaps Elihu Quackenboss
carried off your dispatch-box!

You fool, Charles answered, in his most unamiable manner (he
applies that word to me with increasing frequency); is _that_ what
you've waked me up for Why, the Quackenbosses left Lake George
on Tuesday morning, and I had the dispatch-box in my own hands
on Wednesday.

We have only their word for it, I cried. Perhaps they stopped
on--and walked off with it afterwards!

We will inquire to-morrow, Charles answered. But I confess I
don't think it was worth waking me up for. I could stake my life
on that little woman's integrity.

We _did_ inquire next morning--with this curious result it turned
out that, though the Quackenbosses had left the Lakeside Hotel on
Tuesday, it was only for the neighbouring Washington House, which
they quitted on Wednesday morning, taking the same train for
Saratoga which Charles and I had intended to go by. Mrs. Quackenboss
carried a small brown paper parcel in her hands--in which, under the
circumstances, we had little difficulty in recognising Charles's
dispatch-box, loosely enveloped.

Then I knew how it was done. The chambermaid, loitering about the
room for a tip, was--Mrs. Quackenboss! It needed but an apron to
transform her pretty travelling-dress into a chambermaid's costume;
and in any of those huge American hotels one chambermaid more or
less would pass in the crowd without fear of challenge.

We will follow them on to Saratoga, Charles cried. Pay the bill
at once, Seymour.

Certainly, I answered. Will you give me some money

Charles clapped his hand to his pockets. All, all in the
dispatch-box, he murmured.

That tied us up another day, till we could get some ready cash from
our agents in New York; for the manager, already most suspicious at
the change of name and the accusation of theft, peremptorily refused
to accept Charles's cheque, or anything else, as he phrased it,
except hard money. So we lingered on perforce at Lake George in
ignoble inaction.

Of course, I observed to my brother-in-law that evening, Elihu
Quackenboss was Colonel Clay.

I suppose so, Charles murmured resignedly. Everybody I meet seems
to be Colonel Clay nowadays--except when I believe they _are_, in
which case they turn out to be harmless nobodies. But who would have
thought it was he after I pulled his hair out Or after he persisted
in his trick, even when I suspected him--which, he told us at
Seldon, was against his first principles

A light dawned upon me again. But, warned by previous ebullitions,
I expressed myself this time with becoming timidity. Charles,
I suggested, may we not here again have been the slaves of a
preconception We thought Forbes-Gaskell was Colonel Clay--for
no better reason than because he wore a wig. We thought Elihu
Quackenboss wasn't Colonel Clay--for no better reason than because
he didn't wear one. But how do we know he _ever_ wears wigs Isn't it
possible, after all, that those hints he gave us about make-up, when
he was Medhurst the detective, were framed on purpose, so as to
mislead and deceive us And isn't it possible what he said of his
methods at the Seamew's island that day was similarly designed in
order to hoodwink us

That is so obvious, Sey, my brother-in-law observed, in a most
aggrieved tone, that I should have thought any secretary worth his
salt would have arrived at it instantly.

I abstained from remarking that Charles himself had not arrived at
it even now, until I told him. I thought that to say so would serve
no good purpose. So I merely went on Well, it seems to me likely
that when he came as Medhurst, with his hair cut short, he was
really wearing his own natural crop, in its simplest form and of
its native hue. By now it has had time to grow long and bushy. When
he was David Granton, no doubt, he clipped it to an intermediate
length, trimmed his beard and moustache, and dyed them all red, to
a fine Scotch colour. As the Seer, again, he wore his hair much
the same as Elihu's; only, to suit the character, more combed and
fluffy. As the little curate, he darkened it and plastered it down.
As Von Lebenstein, he shaved close, but cultivated his moustache to
its utmost dimensions, and dyed it black after the Tyrolese fashion.
He need never have had a wig; his own natural hair would throughout
have been sufficient, allowing for intervals.

You're right, Sey, my brother-in-law said, growing almost
friendly. I will do you the justice to admit that's the nearest
thing we have yet struck out to an idea for tracking him.

On the Saturday morning a letter arrived which relieved us a little
from our momentary tension. It was from our enemy himself--but most
different in tone from his previous bantering communications--


Saratoga, Friday.

SIR CHARLES VANDRIFT--Herewith I return your dispatch-box,
intact, with the papers untouched. As you will readily observe,
it has not even been opened.

You will ask me the reason for this strange conduct. Let me be
serious for once, and tell you truthfully.

White Heather and I (for I will stick to Mr. Wentworth's
judicious sobriquet) came over on the Etruria with you,
intending, as usual, to make something out of you. We followed
you to Lake George--for I had 'forced a card,' after my
habitual plan, by inducing you to invite us, with the fixed
intention of playing a particular trick upon you. It formed no
part of our original game to steal your dispatch-box; that I
consider a simple and elementary trick unworthy the skill of a
practised operator. We persisted in the preparations for our
coup, till you pulled my hair out. Then, to my great surprise,
I saw you exhibited a degree of regret and genuine compunction
with which, till that moment, I could never have credited you.
You thought you had hurt my feelings; and you behaved more
like a gentleman than I had previously known you to do. You
not only apologised, but you also endeavoured voluntarily to
make reparation. That produced an effect upon me. You may not
believe it, but I desisted accordingly from the trick I had
prepared for you.

I might also have accepted your offer to go to South Africa,
where I could soon have cleared out, having embezzled thousands.
But, then, I should have been in a position of trust and
responsibility--and I am not _quite_ rogue enough to rob you
under those conditions.

Whatever else I am, however, I am not a hypocrite. I do
not pretend to be anything more than a common swindler. If
I return you your papers intact, it is only on the same
principle as that of the Australian bushranger, who made a
lady _a present_ of her own watch because she had sung to him
and reminded him of England. In other words, he did not take
it from her. In like manner, when I found you had behaved, for
once, like a gentleman, contrary to my expectation, I declined
to go on with the trick I then meditated. Which does not mean
to say I may not hereafter play you some other. _That_ will
depend upon your future good behaviour.

Why, then, did I get White Heather to purloin your dispatch-box,
with intent to return it Out of pure lightness of heart Not
so; but in order to let you see I really meant it. If I had
gone off with no swag, and then written you this letter, you
would not have believed me. You would have thought it was
merely another of my failures. But when I have actually got
all your papers into my hands, and give them up again of my
own free will, you must see that I mean it.

I will end, as I began, seriously. My trade has not quite
crushed out of me all germs or relics of better feeling; and
when I see a millionaire behave like a man, I feel ashamed
to take advantage of that gleam of manliness.

Yours, with a tinge of penitence, but still a rogue, CUTHBERT CLAY.

The first thing Charles did on receiving this strange communication
was to bolt downstairs and inquire for the dispatch-box. It had
just arrived by Eagle Express Company. Charles rushed up to our
rooms again, opened it feverishly, and counted his documents. When
he found them all safe, he turned to me with a hard smile. This
letter, he said, with quivering lips, I consider still more
insulting than all his previous ones.

But, for myself, I really thought there was a ring of truth about
it. Colonel Clay was a rogue, no doubt--a most unblushing rogue;
but even a rogue, I believe, has his better moments.

And the phrase about the position of trust and responsibility
touched Charles to the quick, I suppose, in re the Slump in
Cloetedorp Golcondas. Though, to be sure, it was a hit at me as
well, over the ten per cent commission.



X

THE EPISODE OF THE GAME OF POKER


Seymour, my brother-in-law said, with a deep-drawn sigh, as we
left Lake George next day by the Rennselaer and Saratoga Railroad,
no more Peter Porter for me, _if_ you please! I'm sick of disguises.
Now that we know Colonel Clay is here in America, they serve no
good purpose; so I may as well receive the social consideration and
proper respect to which my rank and position naturally entitle me.

And which they secure for the most part (except from hotel clerks),
even in this republican land, I answered briskly.

For in my humble opinion, for sound copper-bottomed snobbery,
registered A1 at Lloyd's, give _me_ the free-born American citizen.

We travelled through the States, accordingly, for the next four
months, from Maine to California, and from Oregon to Florida,
under our own true names, Confirming the churches, as Charles
facetiously put it--or in other words, looking into the management
and control of railways, syndicates, mines, and cattle-ranches. We
inquired about everything. And the result of our investigations
appeared to be, as Charles further remarked, that the Sabeans who
so troubled the sons of Job seemed to have migrated in a body to
Kansas and Nebraska, and that several thousand head of cattle seemed
mysteriously to vanish, à la Colonel Clay, into the pure air of the
prairies just before each branding.

However, we were fortunate in avoiding the incursions of the Colonel
himself, who must have migrated meanwhile on some enchanted carpet
to other happy hunting-grounds.

It was chill October before we found ourselves safe back in New
York, en route for England. So long a term of freedom from the
Colonel's depredations (as Charles fondly imagined--but I will not
anticipate) had done my brother-in-law's health and spirits a world
of good; he was so lively and cheerful that he began to fancy his
tormentor must have succumbed to yellow fever, then raging in New
Orleans, or eaten himself ill, as we nearly did ourselves, on a
generous mixture of clam-chowder, terrapin, soft-shelled crabs,
Jersey peaches, canvas-backed ducks, Catawba wine, winter cherries,
brandy cocktails, strawberry-shortcake, ice-creams, corn-dodger,
and a judicious brew commonly known as a Colorado corpse-reviver.
However that may be, Charles returned to New York in excellent
trim; and, dreading in that great city the wiles of his antagonist,
he cheerfully accepted the invitation of his brother millionaire,
Senator Wrengold of Nevada, to spend a few days before sailing in
the Senator's magnificent and newly-finished palace at the upper
end of Fifth Avenue.

There, at least, I shall be safe, Sey, he said to me plaintively,
with a weary smile. Wrengold, at any rate, won't try to take me
in--except, of course, in the regular way of business.

Boss-Nugget Hall (as it is popularly christened) is perhaps the
handsomest brown stone mansion in the Richardsonian style on all
Fifth Avenue. We spent a delightful week there. The lines had fallen
to us in pleasant places. On the night we arrived Wrengold gave
a small bachelor party in our honour. He knew Sir Charles was
travelling without Lady Vandrift, and rightly judged he would prefer
on his first night an informal party, with cards and cigars, instead
of being bothered with the charming, but still somewhat hampering
addition of female society.

The guests that evening were no more than seven, all told, ourselves
included--making up, Wrengold said, that perfect number, an octave.
He was a nouveau riche himself--the newest of the new--commonly
known in exclusive old-fashioned New York society as the Gilded
Squatter; for he struck his reef no more than ten years ago; and
he was therefore doubly anxious, after the American style, to be
just dizzy with culture. In his capacity of Mæcenas, he had
invited amongst others the latest of English literary arrivals in
New York--Mr. Algernon Coleyard, the famous poet, and leader of the
Briar-rose school of West-country fiction.

You know him in London, of course he observed to Charles, with
a smile, as we waited dinner for our guests.

No, Charles answered stolidly. I have not had that honour.
We move, you see, in different circles.

I observed by a curious shade which passed over Senator Wrengold's
face that he quite misapprehended my brother-in-law's meaning.
Charles wished to convey, of course, that Mr. Coleyard belonged to
a mere literary and Bohemian set in London, while he himself moved
on a more exalted plane of peers and politicians. But the Senator,
better accustomed to the new-rich point of view, understood Charles
to mean that _he_ had not the entrée of that distinguished coterie in
which Mr. Coleyard posed as a shining luminary. Which naturally
made him rate even higher than before his literary acquisition.

At two minutes past the hour the poet entered. Even if we had not
been already familiar with his portrait at all ages in The Strand
Magazine, we should have recognised him at once for a genuine bard
by his impassioned eyes, his delicate mouth, the artistic twirl of
one gray lock upon his expansive brow, the grizzled moustache that
gave point and force to the genial smile, and the two white rows of
perfect teeth behind it. Most of our fellow-guests had met Coleyard
before at a reception given by the Lotus Club that afternoon, for
the bard had reached New York but the previous evening; so Charles
and I were the only visitors who remained to be introduced to him.
The lion of the hour was attired in ordinary evening dress, with
no foppery of any kind, but he wore in his buttonhole a dainty
blue flower whose name I do not know; and as he bowed distantly to
Charles, whom he surveyed through his eyeglass, the gleam of a big
diamond in the middle of his shirt-front betrayed the fact that the
Briar-rose school, as it was called (from his famous epic), had at
least succeeded in making money out of poetry. He explained to us a
little later, in fact, that he was over in New York to look after
his royalties. The beggars, he said, only gave me eight hundred
pounds on my last volume. I couldn't stand _that_, you know; for a
modern bard, moving with the age, can only sing when duly wound up;
so I've run across to investigate. Put a penny in the slot, don't
you see, and the poet will pipe for you.

Exactly like myself, Charles said, finding a point in common.
_I'm_ interested in mines; and I, too, have come over to look
after my royalties.

The poet placed his eyeglass in his eye once more, and surveyed
Charles deliberately from head to foot. Oh, he murmured slowly. He
said not a word more; but somehow, everybody felt that Charles was
demolished. I saw that Wrengold, when we went in to dinner, hastily
altered the cards that marked their places. He had evidently put
Charles at first to sit next the poet; he varied that arrangement
now, setting Algernon Coleyard between a railway king and a magazine
editor. I have seldom seen my respected brother-in-law so completely
silenced.

The poet's conduct during dinner was most peculiar. He kept quoting
poetry at inopportune moments.

Roast lamb or boiled turkey, sir said the footman.

Mary had a little lamb, said the poet. I shall imitate Mary.

Charles and the Senator thought the remark undignified.

After dinner, however, under the mellowing influence of some
excellent Roederer, Charles began to expand again, and grew lively
and anecdotal. The poet had made us all laugh not a little with
various capital stories of London literary society--at least two of
them, I think, new ones; and Charles was moved by generous emulation
to contribute his own share to the amusement of the company. He was
in excellent cue. He is not often brilliant; but when he chooses, he
has a certain dry vein of caustic humour which is decidedly funny,
though not perhaps strictly without being vulgar. On this particular
night, then, warmed with the admirable Wrengold champagne--the
best made in America--he launched out into a full and embroidered
description of the various ways in which Colonel Clay had deceived
him. I will not say that he narrated them in full with the same
frankness and accuracy that I have shown in these pages; he
suppressed not a few of the most amusing details--on no other
ground, apparently, than because they happened to tell against
himself; and he enlarged a good deal on the surprising cleverness
with which several times he had nearly secured his man; but still,
making all allowances for native vanity in concealment and addition,
he was distinctly funny--he represented the matter for once in its
ludicrous rather than in its disastrous aspect. He observed also,
looking around the table, that after all he had lost less by
Colonel Clay in four years of persecution than he often lost by
one injudicious move in a single day on the London Stock Exchange;
while he seemed to imply to the solid men of New York, that he
would cheerfully sacrifice such a fleabite as that, in return for
the amusement and excitement of the chase which the Colonel had
afforded him.

The poet was pleased. You are a man of spirit, Sir Charles, he
said. I love to see this fine old English admiration of pluck and
adventure! The fellow must really have some good in him, after all.
I should like to take notes of a few of those stories; they would
supply nice material for basing a romance upon.

I hardly know whether I'm exactly the man to make the hero of a
novel, Charles murmured, with complacence. And he certainly didn't
look it.

_I_ was thinking rather of Colonel Clay as the hero, the poet
responded coldly.

Ah, that's the way with you men of letters, Charles answered,
growing warm. You always have a sneaking sympathy with the rascals.

That may be better, Coleyard retorted, in an icy voice, than
sympathy with the worst forms of Stock Exchange speculation.

The company smiled uneasily. The railway king wriggled. Wrengold
tried to change the subject hastily. But Charles would not be put
down.

You must hear the end, though, he said. That's not quite the
worst. The meanest thing about the man is that he's also a
hypocrite. He wrote me _such_ a letter at the end of his last
trick--here, positively here, in America. And he proceeded to give
his own version of the Quackenboss incident, enlivened with sundry
imaginative bursts of pure Vandrift fancy.

When Charles spoke of Mrs. Quackenboss the poet smiled. The worst
of married women, he said, is--that you can't marry them; the
worst of unmarried women is--that they want to marry you. But when
it came to the letter, the poet's eye was upon my brother-in-law.
Charles, I must fain admit, garbled the document sadly. Still, even
so, some gleam of good feeling remained in its sentences. But
Charles ended all by saying, So, to crown his misdemeanours, the
rascal shows himself a whining cur and a disgusting Pharisee.

Don't you think, the poet interposed, in his cultivated drawl, he
may have really meant it Why should not some grain of compunction
have stirred his soul still--some remnant of conscience made him
shrink from betraying a man who confided in him I have an idea,
myself, that even the worst of rogues have always some good in them.
I notice they often succeed to the end in retaining the affection
and fidelity of women.

Oh, I said so! Charles sneered. I told you you literary men have
always an underhand regard for a scoundrel.

Perhaps so, the poet answered. For we are all of us human. Let
him that is without sin among us cast the first stone. And then he
relapsed into moody silence.

We rose from table. Cigars went round. We adjourned to the
smoking-room. It was a Moorish marvel, with Oriental hangings.
There, Senator Wrengold and Charles exchanged reminiscences of
bonanzas and ranches and other exciting post-prandial topics; while
the magazine editor cut in now and again with a pertinent inquiry
or a quaint and sarcastic parallel instance. It was clear he had an
eye to future copy. Only Algernon Coleyard sat brooding and silent,
with his chin on one hand, and his brow intent, musing and gazing at
the embers in the fireplace. The hand, by the way, was remarkable
for a curious, antique-looking ring, apparently of Egyptian or
Etruscan workmanship, with a projecting gem of several large facets.
Once only, in the midst of a game of whist, he broke out with a
single comment.

Hawkins was made an earl, said Charles, speaking of some London
acquaintance.

What for asked the Senator.

Successful adulteration, said the poet tartly.

Honours are easy, the magazine editor put in.

And two by tricks to Sir Charles, the poet added.

Towards the close of the evening, however--the poet still remaining
moody, not to say positively grumpy--Senator Wrengold proposed a
friendly game of Swedish poker. It was the latest fashionable
variant in Western society on the old gambling round, and few of us
knew it, save the omniscient poet and the magazine editor. It turned
out afterwards that Wrengold proposed that particular game because
he had heard Coleyard observe at the Lotus Club the same afternoon
that it was a favourite amusement of his. Now, however, for a while
he objected to playing. He was a poor man, he said, and the rest
were all rich; why should he throw away the value of a dozen golden
sonnets just to add one more pinnacle to the gilded roofs of a
millionaire's palace Besides, he was half-way through with an ode
he was inditing to Republican simplicity. The pristine austerity
of a democratic senatorial cottage had naturally inspired him with
memories of Dentatus, the Fabii, Camillus. But Wrengold, dimly aware
he was being made fun of somehow, insisted that the poet must take
a hand with the financiers. You can pass, you know, he said, as
often as you like; and you can stake low, or go it blind, according
as you're inclined to. It's a democratic game; every man decides for
himself how high he will play, except the banker; and you needn't
take bank unless you want it.

Oh, if you insist upon it, Coleyard drawled out, with languid
reluctance, I'll play, of course. I won't spoil your evening.
But remember, I'm a poet; I have strange inspirations.

The cards were squeezers--that is to say, had the suit and the
number of pips in each printed small in the corner, as well as over
the face, for ease of reference. We played low at first. The poet
seldom staked; and when he did--a few pounds--he lost, with singular
persistence. He wanted to play for doubloons or sequins, and could
with difficulty be induced to condescend to dollars. Charles looked
across at him at last; the stakes by that time were fast rising
higher, and we played for ready money. Notes lay thick on the green
cloth. Well, he murmured provokingly, how about your inspiration
Has Apollo deserted you

It was an unwonted flight of classical allusion for Charles, and I
confess it astonished me. (I discovered afterwards he had cribbed
it from a review in that evening's Critic.) But the poet smiled.

No, he answered calmly, I am waiting for one now. When it comes,
you may be sure you shall have the benefit of it.

Next round, Charles dealing and banking, the poet staked on his
card, unseen as usual. He staked like a gentleman. To our immense
astonishment he pulled out a roll of notes, and remarked, in a quiet
tone, I have an inspiration now. _Half-hearted_ will do. I go five
thousand. That was dollars, of course; but it amounted to a
thousand pounds in English money--high play for an author.

Charles smiled and turned his card. The poet turned his--and won
a thousand.

Good shot! Charles murmured, pretending not to mind, though he
detests losing.

Inspiration! the poet mused, and looked once more abstracted.

Charles dealt again. The poet watched the deal with boiled-fishy
eyes. His thoughts were far away. His lips moved audibly. Myrtle,
and kirtle, and hurtle, he muttered. They'll do for three. Then
there's turtle, meaning dove; and that finishes the possible. Laurel
and coral make a very bad rhyme. Try myrtle; don't you think so

Do you stake Charles asked, severely, interrupting his reverie.

The poet started. No, pass, he replied, looking down at his card,
and subsided into muttering. We caught a tremor of his lips again,
and heard something like this Not less but more republican than
thou, Half-hearted watcher by the Western sea, After long years I
come to visit thee, And test thy fealty to that maiden vow, That
bound thee in thy budding prime For Freedom's bride--

Stake Charles interrupted, inquiringly, again.

Yes, five thousand, the poet answered dreamily, pushing forward
his pile of notes, and never ceasing from his murmur For Freedom's
bride to all succeeding time. Succeeding; succeeding; weak word,
succeeding. Couldn't go five dollars on it.

Charles turned his card once more. The poet had won again. Charles
passed over his notes. The poet raked them in with a far-away air,
as one who looks at infinity, and asked if he could borrow a pencil
and paper. He had a few priceless lines to set down which might
otherwise escape him.

This is play, Charles said pointedly. _Will_ you kindly attend to
one thing or the other

The poet glanced at him with a compassionate smile. I told you I
had inspirations, he said. They always come together. I can't win
your money as fast as I would like, unless at the same time I am
making verses. Whenever I hit upon a good epithet, I back my luck,
don't you see I won a thousand on _half-hearted_ and a thousand on
_budding_; if I were to back _succeeding_, I should lose, to a
certainty. You understand my system

I call it pure rubbish, Charles answered. However, continue.
Systems were made for fools--and to suit wise men. Sooner or later
you _must_ lose at such a stupid fancy.

The poet continued. For Freedom's bride to all _ensuing_ time.

Stake! Charles cried sharply. We each of us staked.

_Ensuing_, the poet murmured. To all _ensuing_ time. First-rate
epithet that. I go ten thousand, Sir Charles, on _ensuing_.

We all turned up. Some of us lost, some won; but the poet had
secured his two thousand sterling.

I haven't that amount about me, Charles said, in that austerely
nettled voice which he always assumes when he loses at cards;
but--I'll settle it with you to-morrow.

Another round the host asked, beaming.

No, thank you, Charles answered; Mr. Coleyard's inspirations
come too pat for my taste. His luck beats mine. I retire from the
game, Senator.

Just at that moment a servant entered, bearing a salver, with a
small note in an envelope. For Mr. Coleyard, he observed; and
the messenger said, _urgent_.

Coleyard tore it open hurriedly. I could see he was agitated. His
face grew white at once.

I--I beg your pardon, he said. I--I must go back instantly. My
wife is dangerously ill--quite a sudden attack. Forgive me, Senator.
Sir Charles, you shall have your revenge to-morrow.

It was clear that his voice faltered. We felt at least he was a man
of feeling. He was obviously frightened. His coolness forsook him.
He shook hands as in a dream, and rushed downstairs for his
dust-coat. Almost as he closed the front door, a new guest entered,
just missing him in the vestibule.

Halloa, you men, he said, we've been taken in, do you know It's
all over the Lotus. The man we made an honorary member of the club
to-day is _not_ Algernon Coleyard. He's a blatant impostor. There's
a telegram come in on the tape to-night saying Algernon Coleyard is
dangerously ill at his home in England.

Charles gasped a violent gasp. Colonel Clay! he shouted, aloud.
And once more he's done me. There's not a moment to lose. After
him, gentlemen! after him!

Never before in our lives had we had such a close shave of catching
and fixing the redoubtable swindler. We burst down the stairs in a
body, and rushed out into Fifth Avenue. The pretended poet had only
a hundred yards' start of us, and he saw he was discovered. But he
was an excellent runner. So was I, weight for age; and I dashed
wildly after him. He turned round a corner; it proved to lead
nowhere, and lost him time. He darted back again, madly. Delighted
with the idea that I was capturing so famous a criminal, I redoubled
my efforts--and came up with him, panting. He was wearing a light
dust-coat. I seized it in my hands. I've got you at last! I cried;
Colonel Clay, I've got you!

He turned and looked at me. Ha, old Ten Per Cent! he called out,
struggling. It's you, then, is it Never, never to _you_, sir! And
as he spoke, he somehow flung his arms straight out behind him, and
let the dust-coat slip off, which it easily did, the sleeves being
new and smoothly silk-lined. The suddenness of the movement threw
me completely off my guard, and off my legs as well. I was clinging
to the coat and holding him. As the support gave way I rolled over
backward, in the mud of the street, and hurt my back seriously. As
for Colonel Clay, with a nervous laugh, he bolted off at full speed
in his evening coat, and vanished round a corner.

It was some seconds before I had sufficiently recovered my breath to
pick myself up again, and examine my bruises. By this time Charles
and the other pursuers had come up, and I explained my condition to
them. Instead of commending me for my zeal in his cause--which had
cost me a barked arm and a good evening suit--my brother-in-law
remarked, with an unfeeling sneer, that when I had so nearly caught
my man I might as well have held him.

I have his coat, at least, I said. That may afford us a clue.
And I limped back with it in my hands, feeling horribly bruised and
a good deal shaken.

When we came to examine the coat, however, it bore no maker's name;
the strap at the back, where the tailor proclaims with pride his
handicraft, had been carefully ripped off, and its place was taken
by a tag of plain black tape without inscription of any sort. We
searched the breast-pocket. A handkerchief, similarly nameless,
but of finest cambric. The side-pockets--ha, what was this I drew
a piece of paper out in triumph. It was a note--a real find--the
one which the servant had handed to our friend just before at the
Senator's.

We read it through breathlessly--


DARLING PAUL,--I _told_ you it was too dangerous. You should have
listened to me. You ought _never_ to have imitated any real person. I
happened to glance at the hotel tape just now, to see the quotations
for Cloetedorps to-day, and what do you think I read as part of the
latest telegram from England 'Mr. Algernon Coleyard, the famous
poet, is lying on his death-bed at his home in Devonshire.' By this
time all New York knows. Don't stop one minute. Say I'm dangerously
ill, and come away at once. Don't return to the hotel. I am removing
our things. Meet me at Mary's. Your devoted, MARGOT.


This is _very_ important, Charles said. This _does_ give us a clue.
We know two things now his real name is Paul--whatever else it may
be, and Madame Picardet's is Margot.

I searched the pocket again, and pulled out a ring. Evidently he had
thrust these two things there when he saw me pursuing him, and had
forgotten or neglected them in the heat of the mêlée.

I looked at it close. It was the very ring I had noticed on his
finger while he was playing Swedish poker. It had a large compound
gem in the centre, set with many facets, and rising like a pyramid
to a point in the middle. There were eight faces in all, some of
them composed of emerald, amethyst, or turquoise. But _one_ face--the
one that turned at a direct angle towards the wearer's eye--was _not_
a gem at all, but an extremely tiny convex mirror. In a moment I
spotted the trick. He held this hand carelessly on the table while
my brother-in-law dealt; and when he saw that the suit and number of
his own card mirrored in it by means of the squeezers were better
than Charles's, he had an inspiration, and backed his luck--or
rather his knowledge--with perfect confidence. I did not doubt,
either, that his odd-looking eyeglass was a powerful magnifier which
helped him in the trick. Still, we tried another deal, by way of
experiment--I wearing the ring; and even with the naked eye I was
able to distinguish in every case the suit and pips of the card that
was dealt me.

Why, that was almost dishonest, the Senator said, drawing back.
He wished to show us that even far-Western speculators drew a line
somewhere.

Yes, the magazine editor echoed. To back your skill is legal;
to back your luck is foolish; to back your knowledge is--

Immoral, I suggested.

Very good business, said the magazine editor.

It's a simple trick, Charles interposed. I should have spotted
it if it had been done by any other fellow. But his patter about
inspiration put me clean off the track. That's the rascal's dodge.
He plays the regular conjurer's game of distracting your attention
from the real point at issue--so well that you never find out what
he's really about till he's sold you irretrievably.

We set the New York police upon the trail of the Colonel; but of
course he had vanished at once, as usual, into the thin smoke of
Manhattan. Not a sign could we find of him. Mary's, we found an
insufficient address.

We waited on in New York for a whole fortnight. Nothing came of it.
We never found Mary's. The only token of Colonel Clay's presence
vouchsafed us in the city was one of his customary insulting notes.
It was conceived as follows--


O ETERNAL GULLIBLE!--Since I saw you on Lake George, I have run
back to London, and promptly come out again. I had business to
transact there, indeed, which I have now completed; the excessive
attentions of the English police sent me once more, like great
Orion, sloping slowly to the west. I returned to America in order
to see whether or not you were still impenitent. On the day of my
arrival I happened to meet Senator Wrengold, and accepted his kind
invitation solely that I might see how far my last communication
had had a proper effect upon you. As I found you quite obdurate,
and as you furthermore persisted in misunderstanding my motives, I
determined to read you one more small lesson. It nearly failed; and
I confess the accident has affected my nerves a little. I am now
about to retire from business altogether, and settle down for life
at my place in Surrey. I mean to try just one more small coup; and,
when that is finished, Colonel Clay will hang up his sword, like
Cincinnatus, and take to farming. You need no longer fear me. I have
realised enough to secure me for life a modest competence; and as
I am not possessed like yourself with an immoderate greed of gain,
I recognise that good citizenship demands of me now an early
retirement in favour of some younger and more deserving rascal. I
shall always look back with pleasure upon our agreeable adventures
together; and as you hold my dust-coat, together with a ring and
letter to which I attach importance, I consider we are quits, and
I shall withdraw with dignity. Your sincere well-wisher, CUTHBERT
CLAY, Poet.


Just like him! Charles said, to hold this one last coup over my
head in terrorem. Though even when he has played it, why should I
trust his word A scamp like that may say it, of course, on purpose
to disarm me.

For my own part, I quite agreed with Margot. When the Colonel was
reduced to dressing the part of a known personage I felt he had
reached almost his last card, and would be well advised to retire
into Surrey.

But the magazine editor summed up all in a word. Don't believe
that nonsense about fortunes being made by industry and ability,
he said. In life, as at cards, two things go to produce
success--the first is chance; the second is cheating.



XI

THE EPISODE OF THE BERTILLON METHOD


We had a terrible passage home from New York. The Captain told us he
knew every drop of water in the Atlantic personally; and he had
never seen them so uniformly obstreperous. The ship rolled in the
trough; Charles rolled in his cabin, and would not be comforted. As
we approached the Irish coast, I scrambled up on deck in a violent
gale, and retired again somewhat precipitately to announce to my
brother-in-law that we had just come in sight of the Fastnet Rock
Lighthouse. Charles merely turned over in his berth and groaned.
I don't believe it, he answered. I expect it is probably Colonel
Clay in another of his manifold disguises!

At Liverpool, however, the Adelphi consoled him. We dined
luxuriously in the Louis Quinze restaurant, as only millionaires
can dine, and proceeded next day by Pullman car to London.

We found Amelia dissolved in tears at a domestic cataclysm. It
seemed that Césarine had given notice.

Charles was scarcely home again when he began to bethink him of
the least among his investments. Like many other wealthy men, my
respected connection is troubled more or less, in the background of
his consciousness, by a pervading dread that he will die a beggar.
To guard against this misfortune--which I am bound to admit nobody
else fears for him--he invested, several years ago, a sum of two
hundred thousand pounds in Consols, to serve as a nest-egg in case
of the collapse of Golcondas and South Africa generally. It is
part of the same amiable mania, too, that he will not allow the
dividend-warrants on this sum to be sent to him by post, but
insists, after the fashion of old ladies and country parsons, upon
calling personally at the Bank of England four times a year to claim
his interest. He is well known by sight to not a few of the clerks;
and his appearance in Threadneedle Street is looked forward to with
great regularity within a few weeks of each lawful quarter-day.

So, on the morning after our arrival in town, Charles observed to
me, cheerfully, Sey, I must run into the City to-day to claim my
dividends. There are two quarters owing.

I accompanied him in to the Bank. Even that mighty official, the
beadle at the door, unfastened the handle of the millionaire's
carriage. The clerk who received us smiled and nodded. How much
he asked, after the stereotyped fashion.

Two hundred thousand, Charles answered, looking affable.

The clerk turned up the books. Paid! he said, with
decision. What's your game, sir, if I may ask you

Paid! Charles echoed, drawing back.

The clerk gazed across at him. Yes, Sir Charles, he answered, in
a somewhat severe tone. You must remember you drew a quarter's
dividend from myself--last week--at this very counter.

Charles stared at him fixedly. Show me the signature, he said at
last, in a slow, dazed fashion. I suspected mischief.

The clerk pushed the book across to him. Charles examined the name
close.

Colonel Clay again! he cried, turning to me with a despondent air.
He must have dressed the part. I shall die in the workhouse, Sey!
That man has stolen away even my nest-egg from me.

I saw it at a glance. Mrs. Quackenboss! I put in. Those portraits
on the Etruria! It was to help him in his make-up! You recollect,
she sketched your face and figure at all possible angles.

And last quarter's Charles inquired, staggering.

The clerk turned up the entry. Drawn on the 10th of July,
he answered, carelessly, as if it mattered nothing.

Then I knew why the Colonel had run across to England.

Charles positively reeled. Take me home, Sey, he cried. I am
ruined, ruined! He will leave me with not half a million in the
world. My poor, poor boys will beg their bread, unheeded, through
the streets of London!

(As Amelia has landed estate settled upon her worth a hundred and
fifty thousand pounds, this last contingency affected me less to
tears than Charles seemed to think necessary.)

We made all needful inquiries, and put the police upon the quest at
once, as always. But no redress was forthcoming. The money, once
paid, could not be recovered. It is a playful little privilege of
Consols that the Government declines under any circumstances to pay
twice over. Charles drove back to Mayfair a crushed and broken man.
I think if Colonel Clay himself could have seen him just then, he
would have pitied that vast intellect in its grief and bewilderment.

After lunch, however, my brother-in-law's natural buoyancy
reasserted itself by degrees. He rallied a little. Seymour, he
said to me, you've heard, of course, of the Bertillon system of
measuring and registering criminals.

I have, I answered. And it's excellent as far as it goes. But,
like Mrs. Glasse's jugged hare, it all depends upon the initial
step. 'First catch your criminal.' Now, we have never caught
Colonel Clay--

Or, rather, Charles interposed unkindly, when you _did_ catch him,
you didn't hold him.

I ignored the unkindly suggestion, and continued in the same voice,
We have never secured Colonel Clay; and until we secure him, we
cannot register him by the Bertillon method. Besides, even if we
had once caught him and duly noted the shape of his nose, his chin,
his ears, his forehead, of what use would that be against a man who
turns up with a fresh face each time, and can mould his features
into what form he likes, to deceive and foil us

Never mind, Sey, my brother-in-law said. I was told in New York
that Dr. Frank Beddersley, of London, was the best exponent of the
Bertillon system now living in England; and to Beddersley I shall
go. Or, rather, I'll invite him here to lunch to-morrow.

Who told you of him I inquired. _Not_ Dr. Quackenboss, I hope;
nor yet Mr. Algernon Coleyard

Charles paused and reflected. No, neither of them, he answered,
after a short internal deliberation. It was that magazine editor
chap we met at Wrengold's.

_He's_ all right, I said; or, at least, I think so.

So we wrote a polite invitation to Dr. Beddersley, who pursued
the method professionally, asking him to come and lunch with us
at Mayfair at two next day.

Dr. Beddersley came--a dapper little man, with pent-house eyebrows,
and keen, small eyes, whom I suspected at sight of being Colonel
Clay himself in another of his clever polymorphic embodiments. He
was clear and concise. His manner was scientific. He told us at once
that though the Bertillon method was of little use till the expert
had seen the criminal once, yet if we had consulted him earlier
he might probably have saved us some serious disasters. A man
so ingenious as this, he said, would no doubt have studied
Bertillon's principles himself, and would take every possible
means to prevent recognition by them. Therefore, you might almost
disregard the nose, the chin, the moustache, the hair, all of which
are capable of such easy alteration. But there remain some features
which are more likely to persist--height, shape of head, neck,
build, and fingers; the timbre of the voice, the colour of the iris.
Even these, again, may be partially disguised or concealed; the way
the hair is dressed, the amount of padding, a high collar round the
throat, a dark line about the eyelashes, may do more to alter the
appearance of a face than you could readily credit.

So we know, I answered.

The voice, again, Dr. Beddersley continued. The voice itself may
be most fallacious. The man is no doubt a clever mimic. He could,
perhaps, compress or enlarge his larynx. And I judge from what you
tell me that he took characters each time which compelled him
largely to alter and modify his tone and accent.

Yes, I said. As the Mexican Seer, he had of course a
Spanish intonation. As the little curate, he was a cultivated
North-countryman. As David Granton, he spoke gentlemanly Scotch.
As Von Lebenstein, naturally, he was a South-German, trying to
express himself in French. As Professor Schleiermacher, he was a
North-German speaking broken English. As Elihu Quackenboss, he
had a fine and pronounced Kentucky flavour. And as the poet, he
drawled after the fashion of the clubs, with lingering remnants
of a Devonshire ancestry.

Quite so, Dr. Beddersley answered. That is just what I should
expect. Now, the question is, do you know him to be one man, or
is he really a gang Is he a name for a syndicate Have you any
photographs of Colonel Clay himself in any of his disguises

Not one, Charles answered. He produced some himself, when he was
Medhurst the detective. But he pocketed them at once; and we never
recovered them.

Could you get any the doctor asked. Did you note the name and
address of the photographer

Unfortunately, no, Charles replied. But the police at Nice showed
us two. Perhaps we might borrow them.

Until we get them, Dr. Beddersley said, I don't know that we can
do anything. But if you can once give me two distinct photographs of
the real man, no matter how much disguised, I could tell you whether
they were taken from one person; and, if so, I think I could point
out certain details in common which might aid us to go upon.

All this was at lunch. Amelia's niece, Dolly Lingfield, was there,
as it happened; and I chanced to note a most guilty look stealing
over her face all the while we were talking. Suspicious as I had
learned to become by this time, however, I did not suspect Dolly of
being in league with Colonel Clay; but, I confess, I wondered what
her blush could indicate. After lunch, to my surprise, Dolly called
me away from the rest into the library. Uncle Seymour, she said
to me--the dear child calls me Uncle Seymour, though of course I am
not in any way related to her--_I_ have some photographs of Colonel
Clay, if you want them.

_You_ I cried, astonished. Why, Dolly, how did you get them

For a minute or two she showed some little hesitation in telling me.
At last she whispered, You won't be angry if I confess (Dolly is
just nineteen, and remarkably pretty.)

My child, I said, why _should_ I be angry You may confide in me
implicitly. (With a blush like that, who on earth could be angry
with her)

And you won't tell Aunt Amelia or Aunt Isabel she inquired
somewhat anxiously.

Not for worlds, I answered. (As a matter of fact, Amelia and
Isabel are the last people in the world to whom I should dream
of confiding anything that Dolly might tell me.)

Well, I was stopping at Seldon, you know, when Mr. David Granton
was there, Dolly went on; --or, rather, when that scamp pretended
he was David Granton; and--and--you won't be angry with me, will
you--one day I took a snap-shot with my kodak at him and Aunt
Amelia!

Why, what harm was there in that I asked, bewildered. The wildest
stretch of fancy could hardly conceive that the Honourable David had
been _flirting_ with Amelia.

Dolly coloured still more deeply. Oh, you know Bertie Winslow she
said. Well, he's interested in photography--and--and also in _me_.
And he's invented a process, which isn't of the slightest practical
use, he says; but its peculiarity is, that it reveals textures. At
least, that's what Bertie calls it. It makes things come out so. And
he gave me some plates of his own for my kodak--half-a-dozen or more,
and--I took Aunt Amelia with them.

I still fail to see, I murmured, looking at her comically.

Oh, Uncle Seymour, Dolly cried. How blind you men are!
If Aunt Amelia knew she would never forgive me. Why, you _must_
understand. The--the rouge, you know, and the pearl powder!

Oh, it comes out, then, in the photograph I inquired.

Comes out! I should _think_ so! It's like little black spots all
over auntie's face. _such_ a guy as she looks in it!

And Colonel Clay is in them too

Yes; I took them when he and auntie were talking together, without
either of them noticing. And Bertie developed them. I've three of
David Granton. Three beauties; _most_ successful.

Any other character I asked, seeing business ahead.

Dolly hung back, still redder. Well, the rest are with Aunt
Isabel, she answered, after a struggle.

My dear child, I replied, hiding my feelings as a husband, I will
be brave. I will bear up even against that last misfortune!

Dolly looked up at me pleadingly. It was here in London, she went
on; --when I was last with auntie. Medhurst was stopping in the
house at the time; and I took him twice, tête-à-tête with Aunt
Isabel!

Isabel does not paint, I murmured, stoutly.

Dolly hung back again. No, but--her hair! she suggested, in a
faint voice.

Its colour, I admitted, is in places assisted by a--well, you
know, a restorer.

Dolly broke into a mischievous sly smile. Yes, it is, she
continued. And, oh, Uncle Sey, where the restorer has--er--restored
it, you know, it comes out in the photograph with a sort of
brilliant iridescent metallic sheen on it!

Bring them down, my dear, I said, gently patting her head with my
hand. In the interests of justice, I thought it best not to frighten
her.

Dolly brought them down. They seemed to me poor things, yet well
worth trying. We found it possible, on further confabulation, by
the simple aid of a pair of scissors, so to cut each in two that
all trace of Amelia and Isabel was obliterated. Even so, however,
I judged it best to call Charles and Dr. Beddersley to a private
consultation in the library with Dolly, and not to submit the
mutilated photographs to public inspection by their joint subjects.
Here, in fact, we had five patchy portraits of the redoubtable
Colonel, taken at various angles, and in characteristic unstudied
attitudes. A child had outwitted the cleverest sharper in Europe!

The moment Beddersley's eye fell upon them, a curious look came over
his face. Why, these, he said, are taken on Herbert Winslow's
method, Miss Lingfield.

Yes, Dolly admitted timidly. They are. He's--a friend of mine,
don't you know; and--he gave me some plates that just fitted my
camera.

Beddersley gazed at them steadily. Then he turned to Charles.
And this young lady, he said, has quite unintentionally and
unconsciously succeeded in tracking Colonel Clay to earth at last.
They are genuine photographs of the man--as he is--_without_ the
disguises!

They look to me most blotchy, Charles murmured. Great black lines
down the nose, and such spots on the cheek, too!

Exactly, Beddersley put in. Those are _differences in texture_.
They show just how much of the man's face is human flesh--

And how much wax, I ventured.

Not wax, the expert answered, gazing close. This is some harder
mixture. I should guess, a composition of gutta-percha and
india-rubber, which takes colour well, and hardens when applied,
so as to lie quite evenly, and resist heat or melting. Look here;
that's an artificial scar, filling up a real hollow; and _this_ is
an added bit to the tip of the nose; and _those_ are shadows, due
to inserted cheek-pieces, within the mouth, to make the man look
fatter!

Why, of course, Charles cried. India-rubber it must be. That's
why in France they call him le Colonel Caoutchouc!

Can you reconstruct the real face from them I inquired anxiously.

Dr. Beddersley gazed hard at them. Give me an hour or two, he
said--and a box of water-colours. I _think_ by that time--putting
two and two together--I can eliminate the false and build up for you
a tolerably correct idea of what the actual man himself looks like.

We turned him into the library for a couple of hours, with the
materials he needed; and by tea-time he had completed his first
rough sketch of the elements common to the two faces. He brought
it out to us in the drawing-room. I glanced at it first. It was
a curious countenance, slightly wanting in definiteness, and not
unlike those composite photographs which Mr. Galton produces by
exposing two negatives on the same sensitised paper for ten seconds
or so consecutively. Yet it struck me at once as containing
something of Colonel Clay in every one of his many representations.
The little curate, in real life, did not recall the Seer; nor
did Elihu Quackenboss suggest Count von Lebenstein or Professor
Schleiermacher. Yet in this compound face, produced only from
photographs of David Granton and Medhurst, I could distinctly trace
a certain underlying likeness to every one of the forms which the
impostor had assumed for us. In other words, though he could make
up so as to mask the likeness to his other characters, he could not
make up so as to mask the likeness to his own personality. He could
not wholly get rid of his native build and his genuine features.

Besides these striking suggestions of the Seer and the curate,
however, I felt vaguely conscious of having seen and observed
_the man himself_ whom the water-colour represented, at some time,
somewhere. It was not at Nice; it was not at Seldon; it was not at
Meran; it was not in America. I believed I had been in a room with
him somewhere in London.

Charles was looking over my shoulder. He gave a sudden little start.
Why, I know that fellow! he cried. You recollect him, Sey; he's
Finglemore's brother--the chap that didn't go out to China!

Then I remembered at once where it was that I had seen him--at the
broker's in the city, before we sailed for America.

What Christian name I asked.

Charles reflected a moment. The same as the one in the note we got
with the dust-coat, he answered, at last. The man is Paul
Finglemore!

You will arrest him I asked.

Can I, on this evidence

We might bring it home to him.

Charles mused for a moment. We shall have nothing against him,
he said slowly, except in so far as we can swear to his identity.
And that may be difficult.

Just at that moment the footman brought in tea. Charles wondered
apparently whether the man, who had been with us at Seldon when
Colonel Clay was David Granton, would recollect the face or
recognise having seen it. Look here, Dudley, he said, holding
up the water-colour, do you know that person

Dudley gazed at it a moment. Certainly, sir, he answered briskly.

Who is it Amelia asked. We expected him to answer, Count von
Lebenstein, or Mr. Granton, or Medhurst.

Instead of that, he replied, to our utter surprise, That's
Césarine's young man, my lady.

Césarine's young man Amelia repeated, taken aback. Oh, Dudley,
surely, you _must_ be mistaken!

No, my lady, Dudley replied, in a tone of conviction. He comes
to see her quite reg'lar; he have come to see her, off and on,
from time to time, ever since I've been in Sir Charles's service.

When will he be coming again Charles asked, breathless.

He's downstairs now, sir, Dudley answered, unaware of the
bombshell he was flinging into the midst of a respectable family.

Charles rose excitedly, and put his back against the door. Secure
that man, he said to me sharply, pointing with his finger.

_What_ man I asked, amazed. Colonel Clay The young man who's
downstairs now with Césarine

No, Charles answered, with decision; Dudley!

I laid my hand on the footman's shoulder, not understanding what
Charles meant. Dudley, terrified, drew back, and would have rushed
from the room; but Charles, with his back against the door,
prevented him.

I--I've done nothing to be arrested, Sir Charles, Dudley cried,
in abject terror, looking appealingly at Amelia. It--it wasn't me
as cheated you. And he certainly didn't look it.

I daresay not, Charles answered. But you don't leave this room
till Colonel Clay is in custody. No, Amelia, no; it's no use your
speaking to me. What he says is true. I see it all now. This villain
and Césarine have long been accomplices! The man's downstairs with
her now. If we let Dudley quit the room he'll go down and tell them;
and before we know where we are, that slippery eel will have
wriggled through our fingers, as he always wriggles. He _is_ Paul
Finglemore; he _is_ Césarine's young man; and unless we arrest him
now, without one minute's delay, he'll be off to Madrid or St.
Petersburg by this evening!

You are right, I answered. It is now or never!

Dudley, Charles said, in his most authoritative voice, stop here
till we tell you you may leave the room. Amelia and Dolly, don't let
that man stir from where he's standing. If he does, restrain him.
Seymour and Dr. Beddersley, come down with me to the servants' hall.
I suppose that's where I shall find this person, Dudley

N--no, sir, Dudley stammered out, half beside himself with fright.
He's in the housekeeper's room, sir!

We went down to the lower regions in a solid phalanx of three. On
the way we met Simpson, Sir Charles's valet, and also the butler,
whom we pressed into the service. At the door of the housekeeper's
room we paused, strategically. Voices came to us from within; one
was Césarine's, the other had a ring that reminded me at once of
Medhurst and the Seer, of Elihu Quackenboss and Algernon Coleyard.
They were talking together in French; and now and then we caught
the sound of stifled laughter.

We opened the door. Est-il drôle, donc, ce vieux the man's
voice was saying.

C'est à mourir de rire, Césarine's voice responded.

We burst in upon them, red-handed.

Césarine's young man rose, with his hat in his hand, in a respectful
attitude. It reminded me at once of Medhurst, as he stood talking
his first day at Marvillier's to Charles; and also of the little
curate, in his humblest moments as the disinterested pastor.

With a sign to me to do likewise, Charles laid his hand firmly on
the young man's shoulder. I looked in the fellow's face there could
be no denying it; Césarine's young man was Paul Finglemore, our
broker's brother.

Paul Finglemore, Charles said severely, otherwise Cuthbert Clay,
I arrest you on several charges of theft and conspiracy!

The young man glanced around him. He was surprised and perturbed;
but, even so, his inexhaustible coolness never once deserted him.
What, five to one he said, counting us over. Has law and order
come down to this Five respectable rascals to arrest one poor
beggar of a chevalier d'industrie! Why, it's worse than New York.
_There_, it was only you and me, you know, old Ten per Cent!

Hold his hands, Simpson! Charles cried, trembling lest his enemy
should escape him.

Paul Finglemore drew back even while we held his shoulders. No,
not _you_, sir, he said to the man, haughtily. Don't dare to lay
your hands upon me! Send for a constable if you wish, Sir Charles
Vandrift; but I decline to be taken into custody by a valet!

Go for a policeman, Dr. Beddersley said to Simpson, standing
forward.

The prisoner eyed him up and down. Oh, Dr. Beddersley! he said,
relieved. It was evident he knew him. If _you've_ tracked me
strictly in accordance with Bertillon's methods, I don't mind so
much. I will not yield to fools; I yield to science. I didn't think
this diamond king had sense enough to apply to you. He's the most
gullible old ass I ever met in my life. But if it's _you_ who have
tracked me down, I can only submit to it.

Charles held to him with a fierce grip. Mind he doesn't break away,
Sey, he cried. He's playing his old game! Distrust the man's
patter!

Take care, the prisoner put in. Remember Dr. Polperro! On what
charge do you arrest me

Charles was bubbling with indignation. You cheated me at Nice,
he said; at Meran; at New York; at Paris!

Paul Finglemore shook his head. Won't do, he answered, calmly. Be
sure of your ground. Outside the jurisdiction! You can only do that
on an extradition warrant.

Well, then, at Seldon, in London, in this house, and elsewhere,
Charles cried out excitedly. Hold hard to him, Sey; by law or
without it, blessed if he isn't going even now to wriggle away
from us!

At that moment Simpson returned with a convenient policeman, whom he
had happened to find loitering about near the area steps, and whom I
half suspected from his furtive smile of being a particular
acquaintance of the household.

Charles gave the man in charge formally. Paul Finglemore insisted
that he should specify the nature of the particular accusation.
To my great chagrin, Charles selected from his rogueries, as best
within the jurisdiction of the English courts, the matter of the
payment for the Castle of Lebenstein--made in London, and through
a London banker. I have a warrant on that ground, he said. I
trembled as he spoke. I felt at once that the episode of the
commission, the exposure of which I dreaded so much, must now
become public.

The policeman took the man in charge. Charles still held to him,
grimly. As they were leaving the room the prisoner turned to
Césarine, and muttered something rapidly under his breath, in
German. Of which tongue, he said, turning to us blandly, in spite
of my kind present of a dictionary and grammar, you still doubtless
remain in your pristine ignorance!

Césarine flung herself upon him with wild devotion. Oh, Paul,
darling, she cried, in English, I will not, I will not! I
will never save myself at _your_ expense. If they send you to
prison--Paul, Paul, I will go with you!

I remembered as she spoke what Mr. Algernon Coleyard had said to us
at the Senator's. Even the worst of rogues have always some good
in them. I notice they often succeed to the end in retaining the
affection and fidelity of women.

But the man, his hands still free, unwound her clasping arms with
gentle fingers. My child, he answered, in a soft tone, I am sorry
to say the law of England will not permit you to go with me. If it
did (his voice was as the voice of the poet we had met), 'stone
walls would not a prison make, nor iron bars a cage.' And bending
forward, he kissed her forehead tenderly.

We led him out to the door. The policeman, in obedience to Charles's
orders, held him tight with his hand, but steadily refused, as the
prisoner was not violent, to handcuff him. We hailed a passing
hansom. To Bow Street! Charles cried, unceremoniously pushing in
policeman and prisoner. The driver nodded. We called a four-wheeler
ourselves, in which my brother-in-law, Dr. Beddersley and myself
took our seats. Follow the hansom! Charles cried out. Don't let
him out of your sight. After him, close, to Bow Street!

I looked back, and saw Césarine, half fainting, on the front door
steps, while Dolly, bathed in tears, stood supporting the
lady's-maid, and trying to comfort her. It was clear she had not
anticipated this end to the adventure.

Goodness gracious! Charles screamed out, in a fresh fever of
alarm, as we turned the first corner; where's that hansom gone to
How do I know the fellow was a policeman at all We should have
taken the man in here. We ought never to have let him get out of
our sight. For all we can tell to the contrary, the constable
himself--may only be one of Colonel Clay's confederates!

And we drove in trepidation all the way to Bow Street.



XII

THE EPISODE OF THE OLD BAILEY


When we reached Bow Street, we were relieved to find that our
prisoner, after all, had _not_ evaded us. It was a false alarm.
He was there with the policeman, and he kindly allowed us to
make the first formal charge against him.

Of course, on Charles's sworn declaration and my own, the man was
at once remanded, bail being refused, owing both to the serious
nature of the charge and the slippery character of the prisoner's
antecedents. We went back to Mayfair--Charles, well satisfied that
the man he dreaded was under lock and key; myself, not too well
pleased to think that the man I dreaded was no longer at large, and
that the trifling little episode of the ten per cent commission
stood so near discovery.

Next day the police came round in force, and had a long consultation
with Charles and myself. They strongly urged that two other persons
at least should be included in the charge--Césarine and the little
woman whom we had variously known as Madame Picardet, White Heather,
Mrs. David Granton, and Mrs. Elihu Quackenboss. If these accomplices
were arrested, they said, we could include conspiracy as one count
in the indictment, which gave us an extra chance of conviction. Now
they had got Colonel Clay, in fact, they naturally desired to keep
him, and also to indict with him as many as possible of his pals
and confederates.

Here, however, a difficulty arose. Charles called me aside with a
grave face into the library. Seymour, he said, fixing me, this
is a serious business. I will not lightly swear away any woman's
character. Colonel Clay himself--or, rather, Paul Finglemore--is an
abandoned rogue, whom I do not desire to screen in any degree. But
poor little Madame Picardet--she may be his lawful wife, and she
may have acted implicitly under his orders. Besides, I don't know
whether I could swear to her identity. Here's the photograph the
police bring of the woman they believe to be Colonel Clay's chief
female accomplice. Now, I ask you, does it in the least degree
resemble that clever and amusing and charming little creature,
who has so often deceived us

In spite of Charles's gibes, I flatter myself I do really understand
the whole duty of a secretary. It was clear from his voice he did
not _wish_ me to recognise her; which, as it happened, I did not.
Certainly, it doesn't resemble her, Charles, I answered, with
conviction in my voice. I should never have known her. But I did
not add that I should no more have known Colonel Clay himself in
his character of Paul Finglemore, or of Césarine's young man, as
_that_ remark lay clearly outside my secretarial functions.

Still, it flitted across my mind at the time that the Seer had made
some casual remarks at Nice about a letter in Charles's pocket,
presumably from Madame Picardet; and I reflected further that Madame
Picardet in turn might possibly hold certain answers of Charles's,
couched in such terms as he might reasonably desire to conceal from
Amelia. Indeed, I must allow that under whatever disguise White
Heather appeared to us, Charles was always that disguise's devoted
slave from the first moment he met it. It occurred to me, therefore,
that the clever little woman--call her what you will--might be the
holder of more than one indiscreet communication.

Under these circumstances, Charles went on, in his austerest
voice, I cannot consent to be a party to the arrest of White
Heather. I--I decline to identify her. In point of fact--he grew
more emphatic as he went on--I don't think there is an atom of
evidence of any sort against her. Not, he continued, after a
pause, that I wish in any degree to screen the guilty. Césarine,
now--Césarine we have liked and trusted. She has betrayed our trust.
She has sold us to this fellow. I have no doubt at all that she
gave him the diamonds from Amelia's rivière; that she took us by
arrangement to meet him at Schloss Lebenstein; that she opened and
sent to him my letter to Lord Craig-Ellachie. Therefore, I say, we
_ought_ to arrest Césarine. But not White Heather--not Jessie; not
that pretty Mrs. Quackenboss. Let the guilty suffer; why strike at
the innocent--or, at worst, the misguided

Charles, I exclaimed, with warmth, your sentiments do you honour.
You are a man of feeling. And White Heather, I allow, is pretty
enough and clever enough to be forgiven anything. You may rely upon
my discretion. I will swear through thick and thin that I do not
recognise this woman as Madame Picardet.

Charles clasped my hand in silence. Seymour, he said, after
a pause, with marked emotion, I felt sure I could rely upon
your--er--honour and integrity. I have been rough upon you
sometimes. But I ask your forgiveness. I see you understand the
whole duties of your position.

We went out again, better friends than we had been for months.
I hoped, indeed, this pleasant little incident might help to
neutralise the possible ill-effects of the ten per cent disclosure,
should Finglemore take it into his head to betray me to my employer.
As we emerged into the drawing-room, Amelia beckoned me aside
towards her boudoir for a moment.

Seymour, she said to me, in a distinctly frightened tone, I have
treated you harshly at times, I know, and I am very sorry for it.
But I want you to help me in a most painful difficulty. The police
are quite right as to the charge of conspiracy; that designing
little minx, White Heather, or Mrs. David Granton, or whatever else
we're to call her, ought certainly to be prosecuted--and sent to
prison, too--and have her absurd head of hair cut short and combed
straight for her. But--and you will help me here, I'm sure, dear
Seymour--I _cannot_ allow them to arrest my Césarine. I don't pretend
to say Césarine isn't guilty; the girl has behaved most ungratefully
to me. She has robbed me right and left, and deceived me without
compunction. Still--I put it to you as a married man--_can_ any woman
afford to go into the witness-box, to be cross-examined and teased
by her own maid, or by a brute of a barrister on her maid's
information I assure you, Seymour, the thing's not to be dreamt of.
There are details of a lady's life--known only to her maid--which
_cannot_ be made public. Explain as much of this as you think well to
Charles, and _make_ him understand that _if_ he insists upon arresting
Césarine, I shall go into the box--and swear my head off to prevent
any one of the gang from being convicted. I have told Césarine as
much; I have promised to help her I have explained that I am her
friend, and that if _she'll_ stand by _me_, _I'll_ stand by _her_,
and by this hateful young man of hers.

I saw in a moment how things went. Neither Charles nor Amelia could
face cross-examination on the subject of one of Colonel Clay's
accomplices. No doubt, in Amelia's case, it was merely a question
of rouge and hair-dye; but what woman would not sooner confess to
a forgery or a murder than to those toilet secrets

I returned to Charles, therefore, and spent half an hour in
composing, as well as I might, these little domestic difficulties.
In the end, it was arranged that if Charles did his best to protect
Césarine from arrest, Amelia would consent to do her best in return
on behalf of Madame Picardet.

We had next the police to tackle--a more difficult business. Still,
even _they_ were reasonable. They had caught Colonel Clay, they
believed, but their chance of convicting him depended entirely upon
Charles's identification, with mine to back it. The more they urged
the necessity of arresting the female confederates, however, the
more stoutly did Charles declare that for his part he could by no
means make sure of Colonel Clay himself, while he utterly declined
to give evidence of any sort against either of the women. It was a
difficult case, he said, and he felt far from confident even about
the man. If _his_ decision faltered, and he failed to identify, the
case was closed; no jury could convict with nothing to convict upon.

At last the police gave way. No other course was open to them. They
had made an important capture; but they saw that everything depended
upon securing their witnesses, and the witnesses, if interfered
with, were likely to swear to absolutely nothing.

Indeed, as it turned out, before the preliminary investigation at
Bow Street was completed (with the usual remands), Charles had been
thrown into such a state of agitation that he wished he had never
caught the Colonel at all.

I wonder, Sey, he said to me, why I didn't offer the rascal two
thousand a year to go right off to Australia, and be rid of him for
ever! It would have been cheaper for my reputation than keeping him
about in courts of law in England. The worst of it is, when once the
best of men gets into a witness-box, there's no saying with what
shreds and tatters of a character he may at last come out of it!

In _your_ case, Charles, I answered, dutifully, there can be
no such doubt; except, perhaps, as regards the Craig-Ellachie
Consolidated.

Then came the endless bother of getting up the case with the
police and the lawyers. Charles would have retired from it
altogether by that time, but, most unfortunately, he was bound
over to prosecute. You couldn't take a lump sum to let me off
he said, jokingly, to the inspector. But I knew in my heart it was
one of the true words spoken in jest that the proverb tells of.

Of course we could see now the whole building-up of the great
intrigue. It had been worked out as carefully as the Tichborne
swindle. Young Finglemore, as the brother of Charles's broker,
knew from the outset all about his affairs; and, after a gentle
course of preliminary roguery, he laid his plans deep for a campaign
against my brother-in-law. Everything had been deliberately
designed beforehand. A place had been found for Césarine as Amelia's
maid--needless to say, by means of forged testimonials. Through her
aid the swindler had succeeded in learning still more of the family
ways and habits, and had acquired a knowledge of certain facts which
he proceeded forthwith to use against us. His first attack, as the
Seer, had been cleverly designed so as to give us the idea that we
were a mere casual prey; and it did not escape Charles's notice now
that the detail of getting Madame Picardet to inquire at the Crédit
Marseillais about his bank had been solemnly gone through on purpose
to blind us to the obvious truth that Colonel Clay was already in
full possession of all such facts about us. It was by Césarine's
aid, again, that he became possessed of Amelia's diamonds, that
he received the letter addressed to Lord Craig-Ellachie, and
that he managed to dupe us over the Schloss Lebenstein business.
Nevertheless, all these things Charles determined to conceal in
court; he did not give the police a single fact that would turn
against either Césarine or Madame Picardet.

As for Césarine, of course, she left the house immediately after the
arrest of the Colonel, and we heard of her no more till the day of
the trial.

When that great day came, I never saw a more striking sight than the
Old Bailey presented. It was crammed to overflowing. Charles arrived
early, accompanied by his solicitor. He was so white and troubled
that he looked much more like prisoner than prosecutor. Outside the
court a pretty little woman stood, pale and anxious. A respectful
crowd stared at her silently. Who is that Charles asked. Though
we could both of us guess, rather than see, it was White Heather.

That's the prisoner's wife, the inspector on duty replied. She's
waiting to see him enter. I'm sorry for her, poor thing. She's a
perfect lady.

So she seems, Charles answered, scarcely daring to face her.

At that moment she turned. Her eyes fell upon his. Charles paused
for a second and looked faltering. There was in those eyes just the
faintest gleam of pleading recognition, but not a trace of the old
saucy, defiant vivacity. Charles framed his lips to words, but
without uttering a sound. Unless I greatly mistake, the words he
framed on his lips were these I will do my best for him.

We pushed our way in, assisted by the police. Inside the court we
saw a lady seated, in a quiet black dress, with a becoming bonnet.
A moment passed before I knew--it was Césarine. Who is--that
person Charles asked once more of the nearest inspector, desiring
to see in what way he would describe her.

And once more the answer came, That's the prisoner's wife, sir.

Charles started back, surprised. But--I was told--a lady outside
was Mrs. Paul Finglemore, he broke in, much puzzled.

Very likely, the inspector replied, unmoved. We have plenty that
way. _When_ a gentleman has as many aliases as Colonel Clay, you can
hardly expect him to be over particular about having only _one_ wife
between them, can you

Ah, I see, Charles muttered, in a shocked voice. Bigamy!

The inspector looked stony. Well, not exactly that, he replied,
occasional marriage.

Mr. Justice Rhadamanth tried the case. I'm sorry it's him, Sey,
my brother-in-law whispered in my ear. (He said _him_, not _he_,
because, whatever else Charles is, he is _not_ a pedant; the English
language as it is spoken by most educated men is quite good enough
for his purpose.) I only wish it had been Sir Edward Easy. Easy's a
man of the world, and a man of society; he would feel for a person
in _my_ position. He wouldn't allow these beasts of lawyers to
badger and pester me. He would back his order. But Rhadamanth is one
of your modern sort of judges, who make a merit of being what they
call 'conscientious,' and won't hush up anything. I admit I'm afraid
of him. I shall be glad when it's over.

Oh, _you'll_ pull through all right, I said in my capacity of
secretary. But I didn't think it.

The judge took his seat. The prisoner was brought in. Every eye
seemed bent upon him. He was neatly and plainly dressed, and,
rogue though he was, I must honestly confess he looked at least a
gentleman. His manner was defiant, not abject like Charles's. He
knew he was at bay, and he turned like a man to face his accusers.

We had two or three counts on the charge, and, after some formal
business, Sir Charles Vandrift was put into the box to bear witness
against Finglemore.

Prisoner was unrepresented. Counsel had been offered him, but he
refused their aid. The judge even advised him to accept their help;
but Colonel Clay, as we all called him mentally still, declined to
avail himself of the judge's suggestion.

I am a barrister myself, my lord, he said--called some nine years
ago. I can conduct my own defence, I venture to think, better than
any of these my learned brethren.

Charles went through his examination-in-chief quite swimmingly.
He answered with promptitude. He identified the prisoner without
the slightest hesitation as the man who had swindled him under
the various disguises of the Reverend Richard Peploe Brabazon,
the Honourable David Granton, Count von Lebenstein, Professor
Schleiermacher, Dr. Quackenboss, and others. He had not the
slightest doubt of the man's identity. He could swear to him
anywhere. I thought, for my own part, he was a trifle too cocksure.
A certain amount of hesitation would have been better policy. As
to the various swindles, he detailed them in full, his evidence to
be supplemented by that of bank officials and other subordinates.
In short, he left Finglemore not a leg to stand upon.

When it came to the cross-examination, however, matters began
to assume quite a different complexion. The prisoner set out by
questioning Sir Charles's identifications. Was he sure of his man
He handed Charles a photograph. Is that the person who represented
himself as the Reverend Richard Peploe Brabazon he asked
persuasively.

Charles admitted it without a moment's delay.

Just at that moment, a little parson, whom I had not noticed till
then, rose up, unobtrusively, near the middle of the court, where
he was seated beside Césarine.

Look at that gentleman! the prisoner said, waving one hand, and
pouncing upon the prosecutor.

Charles turned and looked at the person indicated. His face grew
still whiter. It was--to all outer appearance--the Reverend Richard
Brabazon in propriâ personâ.

Of course I saw the trick. This was the real parson upon whose outer
man Colonel Clay had modelled his little curate. But the jury was
shaken. And so was Charles for a moment.

Let the jurors see the photograph, the judge said, authoritatively.
It was passed round the jury-box, and the judge also examined it.
We could see at once, by their faces and attitudes, they all
recognised it as the portrait of the clergyman before them--not
of the prisoner in the dock, who stood there smiling blandly at
Charles's discomfiture.

The clergyman sat down. At the same moment the prisoner produced a
second photograph.

Now, can you tell me who _that_ is he asked Charles, in the regular
brow-beating Old Bailey voice.

With somewhat more hesitation, Charles answered, after a pause
That is yourself as you appeared in London when you came in the
disguise of the Graf von Lebenstein.

This was a crucial point, for the Lebenstein fraud was the one count
on which our lawyers relied to prove their case most fully, within
the jurisdiction.

Even while Charles spoke, a gentleman whom I had noticed before,
sitting beside White Heather, with a handkerchief to his face,
rose as abruptly as the parson. Colonel Clay indicated him with
a graceful movement of his hand. And _this_ gentleman he asked
calmly.

Charles was fairly staggered. It was the obvious original of the
false Von Lebenstein.

The photograph went round the box once more. The jury smiled
incredulously. Charles had given himself away. His overweening
confidence and certainty had ruined him.

Then Colonel Clay, leaning forward, and looking quite engaging,
began a new line of cross-examination. We have seen, Sir Charles,
he said, that we cannot implicitly trust your identifications. Now
let us see how far we can trust your other evidence. First, then,
about those diamonds. You tried to buy them, did you not, from a
person who represented himself as the Reverend Richard Brabazon,
because you believed he thought they were paste; and if you could,
you would have given him 10 pounds or so for them. _Do_ you think
that was honest

I object to this line of cross-examination, our leading counsel
interposed. It does not bear on the prosecutor's evidence. It is
purely recriminatory.

Colonel Clay was all bland deference. I wish, my lord, he said,
turning round, to show that the prosecutor is a person unworthy of
credence in any way. I desire to proceed upon the well-known legal
maxim of falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus. I believe I am permitted
to shake the witness's credit

The prisoner is entirely within his rights, Rhadamanth answered,
looking severely at Charles. And I was wrong in suggesting that
he needed the advice or assistance of counsel.

Charles wriggled visibly. Colonel Clay perked up. Bit by bit, with
dexterous questions, Charles was made to acknowledge that he wanted
to buy diamonds at the price of paste, knowing them to be real; and,
a millionaire himself, would gladly have diddled a poor curate out
of a couple of thousand.

I was entitled to take advantage of my special knowledge, Charles
murmured feebly.

Oh, certainly, the prisoner answered. But, while professing
friendship and affection for a clergyman and his wife, in straitened
circumstances, you were prepared, it seems, to take three thousand
pounds' worth of goods off their hands for ten pounds, if you could
have got them at that price. Is not that so

Charles was compelled to admit it.

The prisoner went onto the David Granton incident. When you offered
to amalgamate with Lord Craig-Ellachie, he asked, had you or
had you not heard that a gold-bearing reef ran straight from your
concession into Lord Craig-Ellachie's, and that his portion of the
reef was by far the larger and more important

Charles wriggled again, and our counsel interposed; but Rhadamanth
was adamant. Charles had to allow it.

And so, too, with the incident of the Slump in Golcondas.
Unwillingly, shamefacedly, by torturing steps, Charles was compelled
to confess that he had sold out Golcondas--he, the Chairman of the
company, after repeated declarations to shareholders and others
that he would do no such thing--because he thought Professor
Schleiermacher had made diamonds worthless. He had endeavoured to
save himself by ruining his company. Charles tried to brazen it out
with remarks to the effect that business was business. And fraud is
fraud, Rhadamanth added, in his pungent way.

A man must protect himself, Charles burst out.

At the expense of those who have put their trust in his honour and
integrity, the judge commented coldly.

After four mortal hours of it, all to the same effect, my respected
brother-in-law left the witness-box at last, wiping his brow and
biting his lip, with the very air of a culprit. His character had
received a most serious blow. While he stood in the witness-box all
the world had felt it was _he_ who was the accused and Colonel Clay
who was the prosecutor. He was convicted on his own evidence of
having tried to induce the supposed David Granton to sell his
father's interests into an enemy's hands, and of every other shady
trick into which his well-known business acuteness had unfortunately
hurried him during the course of his adventures. I had but one
consolation in my brother-in-law's misfortunes--and that was the
thought that a due sense of his own shortcomings might possibly make
him more lenient in the end to the trivial misdemeanours of a poor
beggar of a secretary!

_I_ was the next in the box. I do not desire to enlarge upon my own
achievements. I will draw a decent veil, indeed, over the painful
scene that ensued when I finished my evidence. I can only say I was
more cautious than Charles in my recognition of the photographs;
but I found myself particularly worried and harried over other
parts of my cross-examination. Especially was I shaken about that
misguided step I took in the matter of the cheque for the Lebenstein
commission--a cheque which Colonel Clay handed to me with the utmost
politeness, requesting to know whether or not it bore my signature.
I caught Charles's eye at the end of the episode, and I venture to
say the expression it wore was one of relief that I too had tripped
over a trifling question of ten per cent on the purchase money of
the castle.

Altogether, I must admit, if it had not been for the police
evidence, we would have failed to make a case against our man
at all. But the police, I confess, had got up their part of the
prosecution admirably. Now that they knew Colonel Clay to be
really Paul Finglemore, they showed with great cleverness how Paul
Finglemore's disappearances and reappearances in London exactly
tallied with Colonel Clay's appearances and disappearances
elsewhere, under the guise of the little curate, the Seer,
David Granton, and the rest of them. Furthermore, they showed
experimentally how the prisoner at the bar might have got himself
up in the various characters; and, by means of a wax bust, modelled
by Dr. Beddersley from observations at Bow Street, and aided by
additions in the gutta-percha composition after Dolly Lingfield's
photographs, they succeeded in proving that the face as it stood
could be readily transformed into the faces of Medhurst and David
Granton. Altogether, their cleverness and trained acumen made up
on the whole for Charles's over-certainty, and they succeeded in
putting before the jury a strong case of their own against Paul
Finglemore.

The trial occupied three days. After the first of the three, my
respected brother-in-law preferred, as he said, not to prejudice the
case against the prisoner by appearing in court again. He did not
even allude to the little matter of the ten per cent commission
further than to say at dinner that evening that all men were bound
to protect their own interests--as secretaries or as principals.
This I took for forgiveness; and I continued diligently to attend
the trial, and watch the case in my employer's interest.

The defence was ingenious, even if somewhat halting. It consisted
simply of an attempt to prove throughout that Charles and I had made
our prisoner the victim of a mistaken identity. Finglemore put into
the box the ingenuous original of the little curate--the Reverend
Septimus Porkington, as it turned out, a friend of his family; and
he showed that it was the Reverend Septimus himself who had sat to
a photographer in Baker Street for the portrait which Charles too
hastily identified as that of Colonel Clay in his personification of
Mr. Richard Brabazon. He further elicited the fact that the portrait
of the Count von Lebenstein was really taken from Dr. Julius Keppel,
a Tyrolese music-master, residing at Balham, whom he put into the
box, and who was well known, as it chanced, to the foreman of the
jury. Gradually he made it clear to us that no portraits existed of
Colonel Clay at all, except Dolly Lingfield's--so it dawned upon
me by degrees that even Dr. Beddersley could only have been misled
if we had succeeded in finding for him the alleged photographs of
Colonel Clay as the count and the curate, which had been shown us
by Medhurst. Altogether, the prisoner based his defence upon the
fact that no more than two witnesses directly identified him; while
one of those two had positively sworn that he recognised as the
prisoner's two portraits which turned out, by independent evidence,
to be taken from other people!

The judge summed up in a caustic way which was pleasant to neither
party. He asked the jury to dismiss from their minds entirely the
impression created by what he frankly described as Sir Charles
Vandrift's obvious dishonesty. They must not allow the fact that he
was a millionaire--and a particularly shady one--to prejudice their
feelings in favour of the prisoner. Even the richest--and vilest--of
men must be protected. Besides, this was a public question. If a
rogue cheated a rogue, he must still be punished. If a murderer
stabbed or shot a murderer, he must still be hung for it. Society
must see that the worst of thieves were not preyed upon by others.
Therefore, the proved facts that Sir Charles Vandrift, with all his
millions, had meanly tried to cheat the prisoner, or some other poor
person, out of valuable diamonds--had basely tried to juggle Lord
Craig-Ellachie's mines into his own hands--had vilely tried to bribe
a son to betray his father--had directly tried, by underhand means,
to save his own money, at the risk of destroying the wealth of
others who trusted to his probity--these proved facts must not
blind them to the truth that the prisoner at the bar (if he were
really Colonel Clay) was an abandoned swindler. To that point alone
they must confine their attention; and _if_ they were convinced that
the prisoner was shown to be the self-same man who appeared on
various occasions as David Granton, as Von Lebenstein, as Medhurst,
as Schleiermacher, they must find him guilty.

As to that point, also, the judge commented on the obvious strength
of the police case, and the fact that the prisoner had not attempted
in any one out of so many instances to prove an alibi. Surely, if
he were _not_ Colonel Clay, the jury should ask themselves, must it
not have been simple and easy for him to do so Finally, the judge
summed up all the elements of doubt in the identification--and all
the elements of probability; and left it to the jury to draw their
own conclusions.

They retired at the end to consider their verdict. While they were
absent every eye in court was fixed on the prisoner. But Paul
Finglemore himself looked steadily towards the further end of the
hall, where two pale-faced women sat together, with handkerchiefs
in their hands, and eyes red with weeping.

Only then, as he stood there, awaiting the verdict, with a fixed
white face, prepared for everything, did I begin to realise with
what courage and pluck that one lone man had sustained so long an
unequal contest against wealth, authority, and all the Governments
of Europe, aided but by his own skill and two feeble women! Only
then did I feel he had played his reckless game through all those
years with _this_ ever before him! I found it hard to picture.

The jury filed slowly back. There was dead silence in court as the
clerk put the question, Do you find the prisoner at the bar guilty
or not guilty

We find him guilty.

On all the counts

On all the counts of the indictment.

The women at the back burst into tears, unanimously.

Mr. Justice Rhadamanth addressed the prisoner. Have you anything
to urge, he asked in a very stern tone, in mitigation of whatever
sentence the Court may see fit to pass upon you

Nothing, the prisoner answered, just faltering slightly. I have
brought it upon myself--but--I have protected the lives of those
nearest and dearest to me. I have fought hard for my own hand. I
admit my crime, and will face my punishment. I only regret that,
since we were both of us rogues--myself and the prosecutor--the
lesser rogue should have stood here in the dock, and the greater in
the witness-box. Our country takes care to decorate each according
to his deserts--to him, the Grand Cross of St. Michael and St.
George; to me, the Broad Arrow!

The judge gazed at him severely. Paul Finglemore, he said, passing
sentence in his sardonic way, you have chosen to dedicate to the
service of fraud abilities and attainments which, if turned from the
outset into a legitimate channel, would no doubt have sufficed to
secure you without excessive effort a subsistence one degree above
starvation--possibly even, with good luck, a sordid and squalid
competence. You have preferred to embark them on a lawless life of
vice and crime--and I will not deny that you seem to have had a good
run for your money. Society, however, whose mouthpiece I am, cannot
allow you any longer to mock it with impunity. You have broken its
laws openly, and you have been found out. He assumed the tone of
bland condescension which always heralds his severest moments. I
sentence you to Fourteen Years' Imprisonment, with Hard Labour.

The prisoner bowed, without losing his apparent composure. But his
eyes strayed away again to the far end of the hall, where the two
weeping women, with a sudden sharp cry, fell at once in a faint on
one another's shoulders, and were with difficulty removed from court
by the ushers.

As we left the room, I heard but one comment all round, thus voiced
by a school-boy I'd a jolly sight rather it had been old Vandrift.
This Clay chap's too clever by half to waste on a prison!

But he went there, none the less--in that cool sequestered vale
of life to recover equilibrium; though I myself half regretted it.

I will add but one more little parting episode.

When all was over, Charles rushed off to Cannes, to get away from
the impertinent stare of London. Amelia and Isabel and I went with
him. We were driving one afternoon on the hills beyond the town,
among the myrtle and lentisk scrub, when we noticed in front of us
a nice victoria, containing two ladies in very deep mourning. We
followed it, unintentionally, as far as Le Grand Pin--that big pine
tree that looks across the bay towards Antibes. There, the ladies
descended and sat down on a knoll, gazing out disconsolately towards
the sea and the islands. It was evident they were suffering very
deep grief. Their faces were pale and their eyes bloodshot. Poor
things! Amelia said. Then her tone altered suddenly.

Why, good gracious, she cried, if it isn't Césarine!

So it was--with White Heather!

Charles got down and drew near them. I beg your pardon, he said,
raising his hat, and addressing Madame Picardet I believe I have
had the pleasure of meeting you. And since I have doubtless paid in
the end for your victoria, _may_ I venture to inquire for whom you
are in mourning

White Heather drew back, sobbing; but Césarine turned to him, fiery
red, with the mien of a lady. For _him_! she answered; for Paul!
for our king, whom _you_ have imprisoned! As long as _he_ remains
there, we have both of us decided to wear mourning for ever!

Charles raised his hat again, and drew back without one word.
He waved his hand to Amelia and walked home with me to Cannes.
He seemed deeply dejected.

A penny for your thoughts! I exclaimed, at last, in a jocular
tone, trying feebly to rouse him.

He turned to me, and sighed. I was wondering, he answered, if
_I_ had gone to prison, would Amelia and Isabel have done as much
for me

For myself, I did _not_ wonder. I knew pretty well. For Charles, you
will admit, though the bigger rogue of the two, is scarcely the kind
of rogue to inspire a woman with profound affection.



THE END
